The Meditations
The idea of philosophy explained
Marcus Aurelius
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nH-Gdnhqr6Q
I. BOOK ONE TO MY MENTORS
1. From my grandfather Verus I learned good morals and the
government of my temper.
From the reputation and remembrance of my father, modesty
and a manly character.
From my mother, piety and beneficence, and abstinence, not
only from evil deeds, but even from evil thoughts; and
further, simplicity in my way of living, far removed from the
habits of the rich.
From my great-grandfather, not to have frequented public
schools, and to have had good teachers at home, and to know
that on such things a man should spend liberally.
2. From my governor, to be neither of the green nor of the
blue party at the games in the Circus, nor a partisan either of
the Parmularius or the Scutarius at the gladiators’ fights; from
him too I learned endurance of labor, and to want little, and to
work with my own hands, and not to meddle with other
people’s affairs, and not to be ready to listen to slander.
3. From Diognetus, not to busy myself about trifling things,
and not to give credit to what was said by miracle-workers
and jugglers about incantations and the driving away of
daemons and such things; and not to breed quails for fighting,
nor to give myself up passionately to such things; and to
endure freedom of speech; and to have and become intimate
I—10

with philosophy; and to have been a hearer, first of Bacchius,
then of Tandasis and Marcianus; and to have written
dialogues in my youth; and to have desired a plank bed and
skin, and whatever else of the kind belongs to the Grecian
discipline.
4. From Rusticus I received the impression that my character
required improvement and discipline; and from him I learned
not to be led astray to sophistic emulation, nor to writing on
speculative matters, nor to delivering little hortatory (inciting)
orations, nor to showing myself off as a man who practices
much discipline, or does benevolent acts in order to make a
display; and to abstain from rhetoric, and poetry, and fine
writing; and not to walk about in the house in my outdoor
dress, nor to do other things of the kind; and to write my
letters with simplicity, like the letter which Rusticus wrote
from Sinuessa to my mother; and with respect to those who
have offended me by words, or done me wrong, to be easily
disposed to be pacified and reconciled, as soon as they have
shown a readiness to be reconciled; and to read carefully, and
not to be satisfied with superficial understanding of books;
nor hastily give my assent to those who talk overmuch; and I
am indebted to him for acquainting me with the discourses of
Epictetus, which he gave to me out of his own collection.
5. From Apollonius I learned freedom of will and undeviating
steadiness of purpose; and to look to nothing else, not even
for a moment, except to reason; and to be always the same, in
sharp pains, on the occasion of the loss of a child, and in long
illness; and to see clearly in a living example that the same
man can be both most resolute and yielding, and not peevish
I—11

in giving his instruction; and to have had before my eyes a
man who clearly considered his experience and his skill in
expounding philosophical principles as the smallest of his
merits; and from him I learned how to receive from friends
what are esteemed favors, without being either humbled by
them or letting them pass unnoticed.
6. From Sextus, a benevolent disposition, and the example of
a family governed in a fatherly manner, and the idea of living
conformably to nature; and gravity without affectation, and to
look carefully after the interests of friends, and to tolerate
ignorant persons, and those who form opinions without
consideration: he had the power of readily accommodating
himself to all, so that intercourse with him was more
agreeable than any flattery; and at the same time he was most
highly venerated by those who associated with him: and he
had the faculty of both discovering and ordering the
principles necessary for life, in an intelligent and methodical
way; and he never showed anger or any other passion, but
was entirely free from passion, and also most affectionate;
and he could express approbation (the proof or admiration)
without noisy display, and he possessed much knowledge
without ostentation.
7. From Alexander the grammarian, to refrain from faultfinding, and not in a reproachful way to chide those who
uttered any barbarous or solecistic (social blunders and
sloppy syntax) or strange-sounding expression; but
dexterously to introduce the very expression which ought to
have been used, and in the way of answer or giving
confirmation, or joining in an inquiry about the thing itself,
I—12

not about the word, or by some other fit suggestion.
8. From Fronto I learned to observe what envy, and duplicity,
and hypocrisy are in a tyrant, and that generally those among
us who are called Patricians are rather deficient in paternal
affection.
9. From Alexander the Platonic, not frequently nor without
necessity to say to anyone, or to write in a letter, that I have
no leisure; nor continually to excuse the neglect of duties
required by our relation to those with whom we live, by
alleging urgent occupations.
10. From Catulus, not to be indifferent when a friend finds
fault, even if he should find fault without reason, but to try to
restore him to his usual disposition; and to be ready to speak
well of teachers, as it is reported of Domitius and
Athenodotus; and to love my children truly.
11. From my brother Severus, to love my kin, and to love
truth, and to love justice; and through him I learned to know
Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion, Brutus; and from him I
received the idea of a polity in which there is the same law
for all, a polity administered with regard to equal rights and
equal freedom of speech, and the idea of a kingly government
which respects most of all the freedom of the governed; I
learned from him also consistency and undeviating steadiness
in my regard for philosophy; and a disposition to do good,
and to give to others readily, and to cherish good hopes, and
to believe that I am loved by my friends; and in him I
observed no concealment of opinions with respect to those he
condemned, and that his friends had no need to conjecture
I—13

what he wished or did not wish, but it was all quite plain.
12. From Maximus I learned self-government, and not to be
led aside by anything; and cheerfulness in all circumstances,
as well as in illness; and a just admixture in the moral
character of sweetness and dignity, and to do what was set
before me without complaining. I observed that everybody
believed that he thought as he spoke, and that in all that he
did he never had any bad intention; and he never showed
amazement and surprise, and was never in a hurry, and never
put off doing a thing, nor was perplexed nor dejected, nor did
he ever laugh to disguise his vexation, nor on the other hand,
was he ever passionate or suspicious. He was accustomed to
do acts of beneficence, and was ready to forgive, and was free
from all falsehood; and he presented the appearance of a man
who could not be diverted from right rather than of a man
who had been improved. I observed too, that no man could
ever think that he was despised by Maximus, nor ever venture
to think himself a better man. He had also the art of being
humorous in an agreeable way.
13. In my father I observed mildness of temper, and
unchangeable resolution in the things which he had
determined after due deliberation; and no vainglory in those
things which men call honors; and a love of labor and
perseverance; and a readiness to listen to those who had
anything to propose for the common weal; and undeviating
firmness in giving to every man according to his deserts; and
a knowledge derived from experience of the occasions for
vigorous action or for remission. And I observed that he had
overcome all passion for boys; and he considered himself no
I—14

more than any other citizen; and he released his friends from
all obligation to sup with him or to attend him of necessity
when he went abroad, and those who had failed to accompany
him, by reason of any urgent circumstances, always found
him the same. I observed too his habit of careful inquiry in all
matters of deliberation, and his persistency, and that he never
stopped his investigation through being satisfied with
appearances which first present themselves; and that his
disposition was to keep his friends, and not to be soon tired of
them, nor yet to be extravagant in his affection; and to be
satisfied on all occasions, and cheerful; and to foresee things
a long way off, and to provide for the smallest without
display; and to check immediately popular applause and all
flattery; and to be ever watchful over the things which were
necessary for the administration of the empire, and to be a
good manager of the expenditure, and patiently to endure the
blame which he got for such conduct; and he was neither
superstitious with respect to the gods, nor did he court men
by gifts or by trying to please them, or by flattering the
populace; but he showed sobriety in all things and firmness,
and never any mean thoughts or action, nor love of novelty.
And the things which conduce in any way to the commodity
of life, and of which fortune gives an abundant supply, he
used without arrogance and without excusing himself; so that
when he had them, he enjoyed them without affectation, and
when he had them not, he did not want them. No one could
ever say of him that he was either a sophist or a home-bred
flippant slave or a pedant; but every one acknowledged him
to be a man ripe, perfect, above flattery, able to manage his
own and other men’s affairs. Besides this, he honored those
I—15

who were true philosophers, and he did not reproach those
who pretended to be philosophers, nor yet was he easily led
by them. He was also easy in conversation, and he made
himself agreeable without any offensive affectation. He took
a reasonable care of his body’s health, not as one who was
greatly attached to life, nor out of regard to personal
appearance, nor yet in a careless way, but so that, through his
own attention, he very seldom stood in need of the
physician’s art or of medicine or external applications. He
was most ready to give way without envy to those who
possessed any particular faculty, such as that of eloquence or
knowledge of the law or of morals, or of anything else; and
he gave them his help, that each might enjoy reputation
according to his deserts; and he always acted conformably to
the institutions of his country, without showing any
affectation of doing so. Further, he was not fond of change
nor unsteady, but he loved to stay in the same places, and to
employ himself about the same things; and after his
paroxysms of headache he came immediately fresh and
vigorous to his usual occupations. His secrets were not but
very few and very rare, and these only about public matters;
and he showed prudence and economy in the exhibition of the
public spectacles and the construction of public buildings, his
donations to the people, and in such things, for he was a man
who looked to what ought to be done, not to the reputation
which is got by a man’s acts. He did not take the bath at
unseasonable hours; he was not fond of building houses, nor
curious about what he ate, nor about the texture and color of
his clothes, nor about the beauty of his slaves. His dress came
from Lorium, his villa on the coast, and from Lanuvium
I—16

generally. We know how he behaved to the toll-collector at
Tusculum who asked his pardon; and such was all his
behavior. There was in him nothing harsh, nor implacable,
nor violent, nor as one may say, anything carried to the
sweating point; but he examined all things severally, as if he
had abundance of time, and without confusion, in an orderly
way, vigorously and consistently. And that might be applied
to him which is recorded of Socrates, that he was able both to
abstain from, and to enjoy, those things which many are too
weak to abstain from, and cannot enjoy without excess. But
to be strong enough both to bear the one and to be sober in
the other is the mark of a man who has a perfect and
invincible soul, such as he showed in the illness of Maximus.
14. To the gods I am indebted for having good grandfathers,
good parents, a good sister, good teachers, good associates,
good kinsmen and friends, nearly everything good. Further, I
owe it to the gods that I was not hurried into any offence
against any of them, though I had a disposition which, if
opportunity had offered, might have led me to do something
of this kind; but through their favor, there never was such a
concurrence of circumstances as put me to the trial. Further, I
am thankful to the gods that I was not longer brought up with
my grandfather’s concubine, and that I preserved the flower
of my youth, and that I did not make proof of my virility
before the proper season, but even deferred the time; that I
was subjected to a ruler and a father who was able to take
away all pride from me, and to bring me to the knowledge
that it is possible for a man to live in a palace without
wanting either guards or embroidered dresses, nor torches and
statues, and such-like show; but that it is in such a man’s
I—17

power to bring himself very near to the fashion of a private
person, without being for this reason either meaner in
thought, nor more remiss in action, with respect to the things
which must be done for the public interest in a manner that
befits a ruler. I thank the gods for giving me such a brother,
who was able by his moral character to rouse me to vigilance
over myself, and who at the same time, pleased me by his
respect and affection; that my children have not been stupid
nor deformed in body; that I did not make more proficiency
in rhetoric, poetry, and the other studies, in which I should
perhaps have been completely engaged, if I had seen that I
was making progress in them; that I made haste to place those
who brought me up in the station of honor, which they
seemed to desire, without putting them off with hope of my
doing it some time after, because they were then still young;
that I knew Apollonius, Rusticus, Maximus; that I received
clear and frequent impressions about living according to
nature, and what kind of a life that is, so that, so far as
depended on the gods, and their gifts, and help, and
inspirations, nothing hindered me from forthwith living
according to nature, though I still fall short of it through my
own fault, and through not observing the admonitions of the
gods, and I may almost say, their direct instructions; that my
body has held out so long in such a kind of life; that I never
touched either Benedicta or Theodotus, and that, after having
fallen into amatory passions, I was cured; and though I was
often out of humor with Rusticus, I never did anything of
which I had occasion to repent; that, though it was my
mother’s fate to die young, she spent the last years of her life
with me; that, whenever I wished to help any man in his need,
I—18

or on any other occasion, I was never told that I had not the
means of doing it; and that to myself the same necessity never
occurred, to receive anything from another; that I have such a
wife, so obedient, and so affectionate, and so simple; that I
had abundance of good masters for my children; and that
remedies have been shown to me by dreams, both others, and
against blood coughing and dizziness...; and that, when I had
an inclination to philosophy, I did not fall into the hands of
any sophist, and that I did not waste my time on writers of
histories, or in the resolution of syllogisms, or occupy myself
about the investigation of appearances in the heavens; for all
these things require the help of the gods and fortune.
15. Among the Quadi at the Granua. (war with a Germanic
tribe on a tributary of the Danube) Begin in the morning by
saying to yourself, I shall meet with the busy-body, the
ungrateful, arrogant, deceitful, envious, unsocial. All these
things happen to them by reason of their ignorance of what is
good and evil. But I who have seen the nature of the good that
it is beautiful, and of the bad that it is ugly, and the nature of
him who does wrong, that it is akin to me, not only of the
same blood or seed, but that it participates in the same
intelligence and the same portion of the divinity, I can neither
be injured by any of them, for no one can fix on me what is
ugly, nor can I be angry with my kinsman, nor hate him, For
we are made for co-operation, like feet, like hands, like
eyelids, like the rows of the upper and lower teeth. To act
against one another then is contrary to nature; and it is acting
against one another to be vexed and to turn away.
16. Whatever this is that I am, it is a little flesh and breath,
and the ruling part. Throw away your books; no longer
I—19

distract yourself: it is not allowed; but as if you were now
dying, despise the flesh; it is blood and bones and a network,
a contexture of nerves, veins, and arteries. See the breath also,
what kind of a thing it is, air, and not always the same, but
every moment sent out and again sucked in. The third then is
the ruling part: consider thus: You are an old man; no longer
let this be a slave, no longer be pulled by the strings like a
puppet to unsocial movements, no longer either be
dissatisfied with your present lot, or shrink from the future.
17. All that is from the gods is full of Providence. That which
is from fortune is not separated from nature or without an
interweaving and involution with the things which are
ordered by Providence. From there all things flow; and there
is besides necessity, and that which is for the advantage of the
whole universe, of which you are a part. But that is good for
every part of nature which the nature of the whole brings, and
what serves to maintain this nature. Now the universe is
preserved as by the changes of the elements, so by the
changes of things compounded of the elements. Let these
principles be enough for you, let them always be fixed
opinions. But cast away the thirst after books, that you may
not die murmuring, but cheerfully, truly, and from your heart
thankful to the gods.

I—20

II. BOOK TWO
1. REMEMBER HOW LONG you have been putting off
these things, and how often you have received an opportunity
from the gods, and yet do not use it. You must now at last
perceive of what universe you are a part, and of what
administrator of the universe your existence is an efflux, and
that a limit of time is fixed for you, which if you do not use it
for clearing away the clouds from your mind, it will go and
you will go, and it will never return.
2. Every moment think steadily as a Roman and a man to do
what you have in hand with perfect and simple dignity, and
feeling of affection, and freedom, and justice; and to give
yourself relief from all other thoughts. And you will give
yourself relief, if you do every act of your life as if it were the
last, laying aside all carelessness and passionate aversion
from the commands of reason, and all hypocrisy, and selflove, and discontent with the portion which has been given to
you. You see how few the things are, which if a man lays
hold of, he is able to live a life which flows in quiet, and is
like the existence of the gods; for the gods on their part will
require nothing more from him who observes these things.
3. Do wrong to yourself, do wrong to yourself, my soul; but
you will no longer have the opportunity of honoring yourself.
Every man’s life is sufficient. But yours is nearly finished,
though your soul reverences not itself but places your felicity
in the hands of others.

II—21

4. Do the things external which fall upon you distract you?
Give yourself time to learn something new and good, and
cease to be whirled around. But then you must also avoid
being carried about the other way. For those too are triflers
who have wearied themselves in life by their activity, and yet
have no object to which to direct every movement, and in a
word, all their thoughts.
5. Through not observing what is in the mind of another, a
man has seldom been seen to be unhappy; but those who do
not observe the movements of their own minds must of
necessity be unhappy.
6. This you must always bear in mind, what is the nature of
the whole, and what is my nature, and how this is related to
that, and what kind of a part it is, of what kind of a whole;
and that there is no one who hinders you from always doing
and saying the things which are according to the nature of
which you are a part.
7. Theophrastus, in his comparison of bad acts—such a
comparison as one would make in accordance with the
common notions of mankind—says, like a true philosopher,
that the offences which are committed through desire are
more blamable than those which are committed through
anger. For he who is excited by anger seems to turn away
from reason with a certain pain and unconscious contraction;
but he who offends through desire, being overpowered by
pleasure, seems to be in a manner more intemperate and more
womanish in his offences. Rightly then, and in a way worthy
of philosophy, he said that the offence which is committed
II—22

with pleasure is more blamable than that which is committed
with pain; and on the whole the one is more like a person who
has been first wronged and through pain is compelled to be
angry; but the other is moved by his own impulse to do
wrong, being carried towards doing something by desire.
8. Since it is possible that you may depart from life this very
moment, regulate every act and thought accordingly. But to
go away from among men, if there are gods, is not a thing to
be afraid of, for the gods will not involve you in evil; but if
indeed they do not exist, or if they have no concern about
human affairs, what is it to me to live in a universe devoid of
gods or devoid of Providence? But in truth they do exist, and
they do care for human things, and they have put all the
means in man’s power to enable him not to fall into real evils.
And as to the rest, if there was anything evil, they would have
provided for this also, that it should be altogether in a man’s
power not to fall into it. Now that which does not make a man
worse, how can it make a man’s life worse? But neither
through ignorance, nor having the knowledge, but not the
power to guard against or correct these things, is it possible
that the nature of the universe has overlooked them; nor is it
possible that it has made so great a mistake, either through
lack of power or lack of skill, that good and evil should
happen indiscriminately to the good and the bad. But death
certainly, and life, honor and dishonor, pain and pleasure, all
these things equally happen to good men and bad, being
things which make us neither better nor worse. Therefore they
are neither good nor evil.
9. How quickly all things disappear; in the universe the
II—23

bodies themselves, but in time the remembrance of them;
what is the nature of all sentient things, and particularly those
which attract with the bait of pleasure or terrify by pain, or
are noised abroad by vapory fame; how worthless, and
contemptible, and sordid, and perishable, and dead they are—
10. All this, it is the part of the intellectual faculty to observe.
To observe too who; these are whose opinions and voices that
give reputation; what death is, and the fact that if a man looks
at it in itself, and by the abstractive power of reflection,
resolves into their parts all the things which present
themselves to the imagination in it, he will then consider it to
be nothing else than an operation of nature; and if anyone is
afraid of an operation of nature, he is a child. This however,
is not only an operation of nature, but it is also a thing which
conduces to the purposes of nature.
11. To observe too how man comes near to the deity, and by
what part of him, and when is this part of man is so disposed.
Nothing is more wretched than a man who traverses
everything in a round, and pries into the things beneath the
earth, as the poet says, and seeks by conjecture what is in the
minds of his neighbors, without perceiving that it is sufficient
to attend to the daemon (divine guide) within him, and to
reverence it sincerely. And reverence of the daemon consists
in keeping it pure from passion and thoughtlessness, and
dissatisfaction with what comes from gods and from men. For
the things from the gods merit veneration for their excellence;
and the things from men should be dear to us by reason of
kinship; and sometimes even, in a manner, they move our
II—24

pity by reason of men’s ignorance of good and bad; this
defect being not less than that which deprives us of the power
of distinguishing things which are white or black.
12. Though you should be going to live three thousand years,
and as many times ten thousand years, still remember that no
man loses any other life than this which he now lives, nor
lives any other than this which he now loses. The longest and
shortest are thus brought to the same. For the present is the
same to all, though that which perishes is not the same; and
so that which is lost appears to be a mere moment. For a man
cannot lose neither the past nor the future: for what a man has
not, how can anyone take this away from him? These two
things then you must bear in mind; the one, that all things
from eternity are of like forms and come round in a circle,
and that it makes no difference whether a man shall see the
same things during a hundred years or two hundred, or an
infinite time; and the second, that the longest lived and he
who will die soonest lose just the same. For the present is the
only thing of which a man can be deprived, if it is true that
this is the only thing which he has, and that a man cannot lose
a thing that he has it not.
13. Remember that all is opinion. For what was said by the
Cynic Monimus is manifest: and manifest too is the use of
what was said, if a man receives what may be got out of it as
far as it is true.
14. The soul of man does violence to itself, first of all, when
it becomes an abscess and, as it were, a tumor on the
universe, so far as it can.
II—25

•

For to be vexed at anything which happens is a
separation of ourselves from nature, in some part of
which the natures of all other things are contained.

•

In the next place, the soul does violence to itself,
when it turns away from any man, or even moves
towards him with the intention of injuring, such as are
the souls of those who are angry.

•

In the third place, the soul does violence to itself when
it is overpowered by pleasure or by pain.

•

Fourthly, when it plays a part, and does or says
anything insincerely and untruly.

•

Fifthly, when it allows any act of its own and any
movement to be without an aim, and does anything
thoughtlessly and without considering what it is, it
being right that even the smallest things be done with
reference to an end;

And, the end for rational animals is to follow the reason and
the law of the most ancient city and polity.
15. Of human life the time is a point, and the substance is in a
flux, and the perception dull, and the composition of the
whole body subject to putrefaction, and the soul a whirl, and
fortune hard to divine, and fame a thing devoid of judgment.
And, to say all in a word, everything which belongs to the
body is a stream, and what belongs to the soul is a dream and
vapor, and life is a warfare and a stranger’s sojourn, and
after-fame is oblivion.
II—26

What then is that which is able to conduct a man? One thing
and only one, philosophy. But this consists in keeping the
daemon within a man free from violence and unharmed,
superior to pains and pleasures, doing nothing without
purpose, nor yet falsely nor with hypocrisy, not feeling the
need of another man’s doing nor his not doing anything; and
besides, accepting all that happens, and all that is allotted, as
coming from thence, wherever it is, from whence he himself
came; and finally waiting for death with a cheerful mind, as
being nothing else than a dissolution of the elements of which
every living being is compounded. But if there is no harm to
the elements themselves in each continually changing into
another, why should a man have any apprehension about the
change and dissolution of all the elements? For it is according
to nature, and nothing is evil which is according to nature.
This in Carnuntum (town on the Danube).

III. BOOK THREE
1. WE OUGHT to consider not only that our life is daily
wasting away and a smaller part of it is left, but another thing
also must be taken into account, that if a man should live
longer, it is quite uncertain whether the understanding will
still continue sufficient for the comprehension of things, and
to retain the power of contemplation which strives to acquire
the knowledge of the divine and the human. For if he shall
begin to fall into dotage, perspiration and nutrition and
III—27

imagination and appetite, and whatever else there is of the
kind, which will not fail to happen; but the power of making
use of ourselves, and filling up the measure of our duty, and
clearly separating all appearances, and considering whether a
man should now depart from life, and whatever else of the
kind absolutely requires a disciplined reason, all of this will
be already extinguished. We must make haste then, not only
because we are daily nearer to death, but also because the
conception of things and the understanding of them cease
before the end.
2. We ought to observe also that even the things which follow
after the things which are produced according to nature,
contain something pleasing and attractive. For instance, when
bread is baked some parts are split at the surface, and these
parts which thus open, and have a certain fashion contrary to
the purpose of the baker’s art, are beautiful in a manner, and
in a peculiar way excite a desire for eating. And again, figs,
when they are quite ripe, gape open; and in the ripe olives the
very circumstance of their being near to rottenness adds a
peculiar beauty to the fruit. And the ears of corn bending
down, and the lion’s eyebrows, and the foam which flows
from the mouth of wild boars, and many other things—
though they are far from being beautiful if a man should
examine them severally—still, because they are consequent
upon the things which are formed by nature, help to adorn
them, and they please the mind; so that if a man should have a
feeling and deeper insight with respect to the things which are
produced in the universe, there is hardly one of those which
follow by way of consequence, which will not seem to him to
be in a manner disposed so as to also give pleasure. And so
III—28

he will even see the real gaping jaws of wild beasts with no
less pleasure than those which painters and sculptors show by
imitation; and in an old woman and an old man he will be
able to see a certain maturity and comeliness; and the
attractive loveliness of young persons, he will be able to look
on with chaste eyes; and many such things will present
themselves, not pleasing to every man, but to him only who
has become truly familiar with nature and her works.
3. Hippocrates after curing many diseases himself fell sick
and died. The Chaldaei (ancient Babylonian people) foretold
the deaths of many, and then fate caught them too. Alexander,
and Pompeius, and Caius Caesar, after so often completely
destroying whole cities, and in battle cutting to pieces many
ten thousands of cavalry and infantry, themselves too at last
departed from life. Heraclitus, after so many speculations on
the conflagration (fire) of the universe, was filled with water
internally and died smeared all over with mud. And lice
destroyed Democritus; and other lice killed Socrates. What
means all this? You have embarked, you have made the
voyage, you have come to the shore; get out. If indeed to
another life, there is no want of gods, not even there. But if to
a state without sensation, you will cease to be held by pains
and pleasures, and to be a slave to the vessel, which is as
much inferior as that which serves it is superior: for the one is
intelligence and deity; the other is earth and corruption.
4. Do not waste the remainder of your life in thoughts about
others, when you do not refer your thoughts to some object of
common utility. For you lose the opportunity of doing
something else when you have such thoughts as these, What
III—29

is such a person doing, and why, and what is he saying, and
what is he thinking of, and what is he contriving, and
whatever else of the kind makes us wander away from the
observation of our own ruling power. We ought then to halt
in the series of our thoughts everything that is without a
purpose and useless, but most of all the over-curious feeling
and the malignant; and a man should use himself to think of
only those things about which if one should suddenly ask,
What have you now in your thoughts? With perfect openness
you might, immediately answer, This or That; so that from
your words it should be plain that everything in you is simple
and benevolent, and such as befits a social animal, and one
that cares not for thoughts about pleasure or sensual
enjoyments at all, nor has any rivalry or envy, suspicion, or
anything else for which you would blush if you should say
that you had it in your mind.
For the man who is such, and no longer delays being among
the number of the best, is like a priest and minister of the
gods, using too the deity which is planted within him, which
makes the man uncontaminated by pleasure, unharmed by
any pain, untouched by any insult, feeling no wrong, a fighter
in the noblest fight, one who cannot be overpowered by any
passion, dyed deep with justice, accepting with all his soul
everything which happens and is assigned to him as his
portion; and not often, nor yet without great necessity and for
the general interest, imagining what another says, or does, or
thinks. For it is only what belongs to himself that he makes
the matter for his activity; and he constantly thinks of that
which is allotted to himself out of the sum and total of things,
and he makes his own acts fair, and he is persuaded that his
III—30

own portion is good.
5. For the lot which is assigned to each man is carried along
with him and carries him along with it. And he remembers
also that every rational animal is his kinsman, and that to care
for all men is according to man’s nature; and a man should
hold on to the opinion not of all, but of those only who
confessedly live according to nature. But as to those who live
not so, he always bears in mind what kind of men they are
both at home and away from home, both by night and by day,
and what they are, and with what men they live an impure
life. Accordingly, he does not value at all the praise which
comes from such men, since they are not even satisfied with
themselves.
6. Labor not unwillingly, nor without regard to the common
interest, nor without due consideration, nor with distraction;
nor let studied ornament set off your thoughts, and be not
either a man of many words, nor busy about too many things.
And further, let the deity which is in you be the guardian of a
living being, manly and of ripe age, and engaged in matters
political (social), and a Roman, and a ruler, who has taken his
post like a man waiting for the signal which summons him
from life, and ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of
any man’s testimony. Be cheerful also, and seek not external
help nor the tranquility which others give. A man then must
stand erect, not be kept erect by others.
7. If you find in human life anything better than justice, truth,
temperance, fortitude, and in a word, anything better than
your own mind’s self-satisfaction in the things which it
III—31

enables you to do according to right reason, and in the
condition that is assigned to you without your own choice; if,
I say, you see anything better than this, turn to it with all your
soul, and enjoy that which you have found to be the best. But
if nothing appears to be better than the deity which is planted
within you, which has subjected to itself all your appetites,
and carefully examines all the impressions, and as Socrates
said, has detached itself from the persuasions of sense, and
has submitted itself to the gods, and cares for mankind; if you
find everything else smaller and of less value than this, give
place to nothing else, for if you do once diverge and incline to
it, you will no longer without distraction be able to give the
preference to that good thing which is your proper possession
and your own; for it is not right that anything of any other
kind, such as praise from the many, or power, or enjoyment
of pleasure, should come into competition with that which is
rationally and politically or practically good. All these things,
even though they may seem to adapt themselves to the better
things in a small degree, obtain the superiority all at once, and
carry us away. But do you, I say, simply and freely choose
the better, and hold to it.—But that which is useful is the
better.—Well then, if it is useful to you as a rational being,
keep to it; but if it is only useful to you as an animal, say so,
and maintain your judgment without arrogance: only take
care that you make the inquiry by a sure method.
8. Never value anything as profitable to yourself which shall
compel you to break your promise, to lose your self-respect,
to hate any man, to suspect, to curse, to act the hypocrite, to
desire anything which needs walls and curtains: for he who
has preferred above everything intelligence, and daemon
III—32

(guardian, guide or god within) and the worship of its
excellence, acts no tragic part, does not groan, will not need
either solitude nor much company; and what is chief of all, he
will live without either pursuing or flying from death; but
whether for a longer or a shorter time he shall have the soul
enclosed in the body, he cares not at all: for even if he must
depart immediately, he will go as readily as if he were going
to do anything else which can be done with decency and
order; taking care of this only all through life, that his
thoughts turn not away from anything which belongs to an
intelligent animal and a member of a civil community.
9. In the mind of one who is chastened and purified you will
find no corrupt matter, nor impurity, nor any sore skinned
over. Nor is his life incomplete when fate overtakes him, as
one may say of an actor who leaves the stage before ending
and finishing the play. Besides, there is in him nothing
servile, nor affected, nor too closely bound to other things,
nor yet detached from other things, nothing worthy of blame,
nothing which seeks a hiding-place.
10. Reverence the faculty which produces opinion. On this
faculty it entirely depends whether there shall exist in your
ruling part, any opinion inconsistent with nature and the
constitution of the rational animal. And this faculty promises
freedom from hasty judgment, and friendship towards men,
and obedience to the gods.
Throwing away then all things, hold to these only which are
few; and besides bear in mind that every man lives only this
present time, which is an indivisible point, and that all the rest
III—33

of his life is either past or it is uncertain. Short then is the
time which every man lives, and small the nook of the earth
where he lives; and short too the longest posthumous fame,
and even this only continued by a succession of poor human
beings, who will very soon die, and who know not even
themselves, much less him who died long ago.
11. To the aids which have been mentioned let this one still
be added:—Make for yourself a definition or description of
the thing which is presented to you, so as to see distinctly
what kind of a thing it is in its substance, in its nudity, in its
complete entirety, and tell yourself its proper name, and the
names of the things of which it has been compounded, and
into which it will be resolved. For nothing is so productive of
the elevation of mind as to be able to examine methodically
and truly every object which is presented to you in life, and
always to look at things so as to see at the same time what
kind of universe this is, and what kind of use everything
performs in it, and what value everything has with reference
to the whole, and what with reference to man, who is a citizen
of the highest city, of which all other cities are like families;
what each thing is, and of what it is composed, and how long
it is the nature of this thing to endure, which now makes an
impression on me.
12. And what virtue I have need of with respect to it, such as
gentleness, manliness, truth, fidelity, simplicity, contentment,
and all the rest. Wherefore, on every occasion a man should
say: this comes from God; and this is according to the
apportionment and spinning of the thread of destiny, and
such-like coincidence and chance; and this is from one of the
III—34

same stock, and a kinsman and partner, one who knows not
however what is according to his nature. But I know; for this
reason I behave towards him according to the natural law of
fellowship with benevolence and justice. At the same time
however in things indifferent I attempt to ascertain the value
of each.
13. If you work at that which is before you, following right
reason seriously, vigorously, calmly, without allowing
anything else to distract you, but keeping your divine part
pure, as if you should be bound to give it back immediately;
if you hold to this, expecting nothing, fearing nothing, but
satisfied with your present activity according to nature, and
with heroic truth in every word and sound which you uttered,
you will live happy. And there is no man who is able to
prevent this.
14. As physicians have always their instruments and knives
ready for cases which suddenly require their skill, so do you
have principles ready for the understanding of things divine
and human, and for doing everything, even the smallest, with
a recollection of the bond which unites the divine and the
human to one another. For neither will you do anything well,
which pertains to man, without at the same time having a
reference to things divine; nor the contrary.
15. No longer wander at hazard; for neither will you read
your own memoirs, nor the acts of the ancient Romans and
Hellenes, and the selections from books which you were
reserving for your old age. Hasten then to the end, which you
have before you, and throwing away idle hopes, come to your
III—35

own aid, if you care at all for yourself, while in your power.
16. They know not how many things are signified by the
words stealing, sowing, buying, keeping quiet, seeing what
ought to be done; for this is not effected by the eyes, but by
another kind of vision.
17. Body, soul, intelligence: to the body belong sensations, to
the soul belong appetites, to the intelligence belong
principles. To receive the impressions of forms by means of
appearances belongs even to animals; to be pulled by the
strings of desire belongs both to wild beasts and to men who
have made themselves into women, and to a Phalaris and a
Nero: and to have the intelligence that guides to the things
which appear suitable, belongs also to those who do not
believe in the gods, and who betray their country, and do their
impure deeds when they have shut the doors.
If then everything else is common to all that I have
mentioned, there remains that which is peculiar to the good
man, to be pleased and content with what happens, and with
the thread which is spun for him; and not to defile the divinity
which is planted in his breast, nor disturb it by a crowd of
images, but to preserve it tranquil, following it obediently as
a god, neither saying anything contrary to the truth, nor doing
anything contrary to justice. And if all men refuse to believe
that he lives a simple, modest, and contented life, he is neither
angry with any of them, nor does he deviate from the way
which leads to the end of life, to which a man ought to come
pure, tranquil, ready to depart, and without any compulsion
perfectly reconciled to his lot.
III—36

IV. BOOK FOUR
1. THAT WHICH RULES within, when it is according to
nature, is so affected with respect to the events which happen,
that it always easily adapts itself to that which is and is
presented to it. For it requires no definite material, however it
moves towards its purpose under certain conditions; it makes
a material for itself out of that which opposes it, as fire lays
hold of what falls into it, by which a small light would have
been extinguished: but when the fire is strong, it soon
appropriates to itself the matter which is heaped upon it, and
consumes it, and rises higher by means of this very material.
2. Let no act be done without a purpose, nor otherwise than
according to the perfect principles of art.
3. Men seek retreats for themselves, houses in the country,
seashores, and mountains; and you too perhaps desire such
things very much. But this is altogether a mark of the most
common sort of men, for it is in your power whenever you
shall choose to retire into yourself. For nowhere, either with
more quiet or more freedom from trouble does a man retire
than into his own soul, particularly when he has within him
such thoughts, that by looking into them he is immediately in
perfect tranquility; and I affirm that tranquility is nothing else
than the good ordering of the mind. Constantly then give to
yourself this retreat, and renew yourself; and let your
principles be brief and fundamental, which as soon as you
shall recur to them, will be sufficient to cleanse the soul
completely, and to send you back free from all discontent
IV—37

with the things to which you return. For with what are you
discontented? With the badness of men? Recall to your mind
this conclusion, that rational animals exist for one another,
and that to endure is a part of justice, and that men do wrong
involuntarily; and consider how many already, after mutual
enmity, suspicion, hatred, and fighting, have been stretched
dead, reduced to ashes; and be quiet at last.—
But perhaps you are dissatisfied with that which is assigned
to you out of the universe.— Recall to your recollection this
alternative; either there is providence or atoms, fortuitous
concurrence of things; or remember the arguments by which
it has been proven that the world is a kind of political
community, and be quiet at last.—But perhaps corporeal
things will still fasten upon you.—
Consider then further that the mind mingles not with the
breath, whether moving gently or violently, when it has once
drawn itself apart and discovered its own power, and think
also of all that you have heard and assented to about pain and
pleasure, and be quiet at last.—But perhaps the desire of the
thing called fame will torment you.—See how soon
everything is forgotten, and look at the chaos of infinite time
on each side of the present, and the emptiness of applause,
and the changeableness and want of judgment in those who
pretend to give praise, and the narrowness of the space within
which it is circumscribed, and be quiet at last. For the whole
earth is a point, and how small a nook in it is this, your
dwelling, and how few are there in it, and what kind of people
are they who will praise you.

IV—38

This then remains: Remember to retire into this little territory
of your own, and above all do not distract or strain yourself,
but be free, and look at things as a man, as a human being, as
a citizen, as a mortal. But among the things ready to your
hand to which you shall turn, let there be these which are two.
One is that things do not touch the soul, for they are external
and remain immovable; but our perturbations come only from
the opinion, which is within. The other is that all these things
which you see, change immediately and will no longer be;
and constantly bear in mind how many of these changes you
have already witnessed. The universe is transformation: life is
opinion.
4. If our intellectual part is common, the reason also, in
respect of which we are rational beings, is common: ✓ if this
is so, common also is the reason which commands us what to
do, and what not to do; ✓ if this is so, there is a common law
also; ✓ if this is so, we are fellow-citizens; ✓ if this is so, we
are members of some political community; ✓ if this is so, the
world is in a manner a state. For of what other common
political community will any one say that the whole of human
races are members? And from thence, from this common
political community comes also our very intellectual faculty
and reasoning faculty and our capacity for law; or from
whence do they come? For as my earthly part is a portion
given to me from certain earth, and that which is watery from
another element, and that which is hot and fiery from some
peculiar source (for nothing comes out of that which is
nothing, as nothing also returns to non-existence), so also the
intellectual part comes from some source.

IV—39

5. Death is such as generation is, a mystery of nature; a
composition out of the same elements, and a decomposition
into the same; and altogether not a thing of which any man
should be ashamed, for it is not contrary to the nature of a
reasonable animal, and not contrary to the reason of our
constitution.
6. It is natural that these things should be done by such
persons, it is a matter of necessity; and if a man will not have
it so, he will not allow the fig-tree to have juice. But by all
means bear this in mind, that within a very short time both
you and he will be dead; and soon not even your names will
be left behind.
7. Take away your opinion, and then there is taken away the
complaint, “I have been harmed.” Take away the complaint,
“I have been harmed,” and the harm is taken away.
That which does not make a man worse than he was, also
does not make his life worse, nor does it harm him either
from without or from within.
The nature of that which is universally useful has been
compelled to do this.
8. Consider that everything which happens, happens justly,
and if you observe carefully, you will find it to be so. I do not
say only with respect to the continuity of the series of things,
but with respect to what is just, and as if it were done by one
who assigns to each thing its value. Observe then as you have
begun; and whatever you do, do it in conjunction with this,
the being good, and in the sense in which a man is properly
IV—40

understood to be good. Keep to this in every action.
9. Do not have such an opinion of things as he has who does
you wrong, or such as he wishes you to have, but look at
them as they are in truth.
10. A man should always have these two rules in readiness;
the one, to do only whatever the reason of the ruling and
legislating faculty may suggest for the use of men; the other
to change your opinion, if there is anyone at hand who sets
you right and moves you from any opinion. But this change
of opinion must proceed only from a certain persuasion, as of
what is just or of common advantage and the like, not because
it appears pleasant or brings reputation.
11. Have you reason? I have.—Why then do not you use it?
For if this does its own work, what else do you wish?
12. You have existed as a part. You shall disappear into that
which produced you; but rather you shall be received back
into its seminal principle by transmutation.
Many grains of frankincense on the same altar: one falls
before, another falls after; but it makes no difference.
13. Within ten days you will seem a god to those to whom
you are now a beast and an ape, if you will return to your
principles and the worship of reason.
14. Do not act as if you were going to live ten thousand years.
Death hangs over you. While you live, while it is in your
power, be good.

IV—41

15. How much trouble he avoids who does not look to see
what his neighbor says or does or thinks, but only to what he
does himself, that it may be just and pure; or as Agathon says,
look not around at the depraved morals of others, but run
straight along the line without deviating from it.
16. He who has a vehement desire for posthumous fame does
not consider that every one of those who remember him will
themselves also die very soon; then again also they who have
succeeded them, until the whole remembrance shall have
been extinguished as it is transmitted through men who
foolishly admire and perish. But suppose that those who will
remember are even immortal, and that the remembrance will
be immortal, what then is this to you? And I say not what is it
to the dead, but what is it to the living? What is praise except
indeed so far as it has a certain utility? For you now reject
unseasonably the gift of nature, clinging to something else...
Everything which is in any way beautiful, is beautiful in
itself, and terminates in itself, not having praise as part of
itself. Neither worse then nor better is a thing made by being
praised. I affirm this also of the things which are called
beautiful by the vulgar, for example, material things and
works of art. That which is really beautiful has no need of
anything; not more than law, not more than truth, not more
than benevolence or modesty. Which of these things is
beautiful because it is praised, or spoiled by being blamed? Is
such a thing as an emerald made worse than it was, if it is not
praised? Or gold, ivory, purple, a lyre, a little knife, a flower,
or a shrub?

IV—42

17. If souls continue to exist, how does the air contain them
from eternity?—But how does the earth contain the bodies of
those who have been buried from time so remote? For as here
the mutation of these bodies after a certain continuance,
whatever it may be, and their dissolution makes room for
other dead bodies; so the souls which are removed into the air
after subsisting for some time are transmuted and diffused,
and they assume a fiery nature by being received into the
seminal intelligence of the universe, and in this way make
room for the fresh souls which come to dwell there. And this
is the answer which a man might give on the hypothesis of
souls continuing to exist. But we must not only think of the
number of bodies which are thus buried, but also of the
number of animals which are daily eaten by us and the other
animals. For what a number is consumed, and thus in a
manner buried in the bodies of those who have fed on them!
And nevertheless this earth receives them by reason of the
changes of these bodies into blood, and the transformations
into the aerial or the fiery element.
What is the investigation into the truth in this matter? The
division into that which is material and that which is the
cause of form, the formal.
18. Do not be whirled about, but in every movement have
respect to justice, and on the occasion of every impression
maintain the faculty of comprehension or understanding.
19. Everything harmonizes with me, which is harmonious to
you, O Universe. Nothing for me is too early nor too late,
which is in due time for you. Everything is fruit to me, which
IV—43

your seasons bring, O Nature: from you are all things, in you
are all things, to you all things return. The poet says, Dear
city of Cecrops (mythical king); and will not you say, Dear
city of Zeus?
20. Occupy yourself with few things, says the philosopher, if
you would be tranquil.—But consider if it would not be better
to say, Do what is necessary, and whatever the reason of the
animal which is naturally social requires, and as it requires.
For this brings not only the tranquility which comes from
doing well, but also that which comes from doing few things.
For the greatest part of what we say and do being
unnecessary, if a man takes this away, he will have more
leisure and less uneasiness. Accordingly on every occasion a
man should ask himself, Is this one of the unnecessary
things? Now a man should take away not only unnecessary
acts, but also unnecessary thoughts, for thus superfluous acts
will not follow after.
21. Try how the life of the good man suits you, the life of him
who is satisfied with his portion out of the whole, and
satisfied with his own just acts and benevolent disposition.
Have you seen those things? Look also at these. Do not
disturb yourself. Make yourself all simplicity. Does anyone
do wrong? It is to himself that he does the wrong.
22. Has anything happened to you? Well; out of the universe
from the beginning everything which happens has been
apportioned and spun out to you. In a word, your life is short.
You must turn to profit the present by the aid of reason and
justice. Be sober in your relaxation.
IV—44

23. Either it is a well-arranged universe or a chaos huddled
together, but still a universe. But can a certain order subsist in
you, and disorder in the All? And this too when all things are
so separated and diffused and sympathetic. A black character,
a womanish character, a stubborn character, bestial, childish,
animal, stupid, counterfeit, scurrilous (unfair criticism),
fraudulent, tyrannical.
24. If he is a stranger to the universe who does not know what
is in it, no less is he a stranger who does not know what is
going on in it. He is a runaway, who flies from social reason;
he is blind, who shuts the eyes of understanding; he is poor,
who has need of another, and has not from himself all things
which are useful for life. He is an abscess on the universe
who withdraws and separates himself from the reason of our
common nature through being displeased with the things
which happen, for the same nature produces this, and has
produced you too: he is a piece rent asunder from the state,
who tears his own soul from that of reasonable animals, of
which he is one.
25. The one is a philosopher without a tunic, and the other
without a book: here is another half naked: Bread I have not,
he says, and I abide by reason.—And I do not get the means
of living out of my learning, and I abide by my reason.
26. Love your art, poor as it may be, which you have learned,
and be content with it; and pass through the rest of life like
one who has entrusted to the gods with his whole soul all that
he has, making yourself neither the tyrant nor the slave of any
man.
IV—45

27. Consider, for example, the times of Vespasian. You will
see all these things, people marrying, bringing up children,
sick, dying, warring, feasting, trafficking, cultivating the
ground, flattering, obstinately arrogant, suspecting, plotting,
wishing for some to die, grumbling about the present, loving,
heaping up treasure, desiring consulship, kingly power. Well
then, that life of these people no longer exists at all. Again,
remove to the times of Trajan. Again, all is the same. Their
life too is gone. In like manner view also the other epochs of
time and of whole nations, and see how many after great
efforts soon fell and were resolved into the elements. But
chiefly you should think of those whom you have yourself
known distracting themselves about idle things, neglecting to
do what was in accordance with their proper constitution, and
to hold firmly to this and to be content with it. And herein it
is necessary to remember that the attention given to
everything has its proper value and proportion. For thus you
will not be dissatisfied, if you apply yourself to smaller
matters no further than is fit.
28. The words which were formerly familiar are now
antiquated: so also the names of those who were famed of
old, are now in a manner antiquated, Camillus, Caeso,
Volesus, Leonnatus, and a little after also Scipio and Cato,
then Augustus, then also Hadrian and Antoninus. For all
things soon pass away and become a mere tale, and complete
oblivion soon buries them. And I say this of those who have
shone in a wondrous way. For the rest; as soon as they have
breathed out their breath, they are gone, and no man speaks of
them. And to conclude the matter, what is even an eternal
remembrance? A mere nothing. What then is that about which
IV—46

we ought to employ our serious pains? This one thing,
thoughts just, and acts social, and words which never lie, and
a disposition which gladly accepts all that happens, as
necessary, as usual, as flowing from a principle and a source
of the same kind. Willingly give yourself up to Clotho, one of
the Fates, allowing her to spin your thread into whatever
things she pleases.
29. Everything is only for a day, both that which remembers
and that which is remembered. Observe constantly that all
things take place by change, and accustom yourself to
consider that the nature of the Universe loves nothing so
much as to change the things which are and to make new
things like them. For everything that exists is in a manner the
seed of that which will be. But you are thinking only of seeds,
which are cast into the earth or into a womb: but this is a very
vulgar notion.
30. You will soon die, and you are not yet simple, not free
from perturbations, nor without suspicion of being hurt by
external things, nor kindly disposed towards all; nor do you
yet place wisdom in only acting justly.
31. Examine men’s ruling principles, even those of the wise,
what kind of things they avoid, and what kind they pursue.
32. What is evil to you does not subsist in the ruling principle
of another; nor yet in any turning and mutation of your
corporeal covering. Where is it then? It is in that part of you
in which subsists the power of forming opinions about evils.
Let this power then not form such opinions, and all is well.
And if that which is nearest to it, the poor body, is burnt,
IV—47

filled with matter and rottenness, nevertheless let the part
which forms opinions about these things be quiet, that is, let it
judge that nothing is neither bad nor good which can happen
equally to the bad man and the good. For that which happens
equally to him who lives contrary to nature and to him who
lives according to nature, is neither according to nature nor
contrary to nature.
33. Constantly regard the universe as one living being, having
one substance and one soul; and observe how all things have
reference to one perception, the perception of this one living
being; and how all things act with one movement; and how
all things are the cooperating causes of all things which exist;
observe too the continuous spinning of the thread and the
contexture of the web.
34. You are a little soul bearing about a corpse, as Epictetus
used to say.
35. It is no evil for things to undergo change, and no good for
things to subsist in consequence of change. Time is like a
river made up of the events which happen, and a violent
stream; for as soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried
away, and another comes in its place, and this will be carried
away too.
36. Everything which happens is as familiar and well known
as the rose in spring and the fruit in summer; for such is
disease, and death, and calumny, and treachery, and whatever
else delights fools or vexes them.
In the series of things those which follow are always aptly
IV—48

fitted to those which have gone before; for this series is not
like a mere enumeration of disjointed things, which has only
a necessary sequence, but it is a rational connection: and as
all existing things are arranged together harmoniously, so the
things which come into existence exhibit no mere succession,
but a certain wonderful relationship.
37. Always remember the saying of Heraclitus, that the death
of earth is to become water, and the death of water is to
become air, and the death of air is to become fire, and
reversely. And think too of him who forgets where the way
leads, and that men quarrel with that with which they are
most constantly in communion, the reason which governs the
universe; and the things which daily meet with them seem
strange: and consider that we ought not to act and speak as if
we were asleep, for even in sleep we seem to act and speak;
and that we ought not, like children who learn from their
parents, simply to act and speak as we have been taught.
38. If any god told you that you shall die tomorrow, or
certainly on the day after tomorrow, you would not care much
whether it was on the third day or on the morrow, unless you
were in the highest degree mean-spirited—for how small is
the difference?— So think it no great thing to die after as
many years as you can name rather than tomorrow.
39. Think continually how many physicians are dead after
often contracting their eyebrows over the sick; and how many
astrologers after predicting with great pretensions the deaths
of others; and how many philosophers after endless
discourses on death or immortality; how many heroes after
IV—49

killing thousands; and how many tyrants who have used their
power over men’s lives with terrible insolence as if they were
immortal; and how many cities are entirely dead, so to speak,
Helice and Pompeii and Herculaneum, and others
innumerable. Add to the reckoning all whom you have
known, one after another. One man after burying another has
been laid out dead, and another buries him: and all this in a
short time. To conclude, always observe how ephemeral and
worthless human things are, and what was yesterday a little
mucus tomorrow will be a mummy or ashes. Pass then
through this little space of time conformably to nature, and
end your journey in contentment, just as an olive falls off
when it is ripe, blessing nature who produced it, and thanking
the tree on which it grew.
40. Be like the promontory against which the waves
continually break, but it stands firm and tames the fury of the
water around it.
41. Unhappy am I because this has happened to me.—Not so,
but happy am I, though this has happened to me, because I
continue free from pain, neither crushed by the present nor
fearing the future. For such a thing as this might have
happened to every man; but every man would not have
continued free from pain on such an occasion. Why then is
that rather a misfortune than this a good fortune? And do you
in all cases call that, a man’s misfortune, which is not a
deviation from man’s nature? And does a thing seem to you
to be a deviation from man’s nature, when it is not contrary to
the will of man’s nature? Well do you know the will of
nature. Will then this which has happened prevent you from
IV—50

being just, magnanimous, temperate, prudent, secure against
inconsiderate opinions and falsehood; will it prevent you
from having modesty, freedom, and everything else, by the
presence of which man’s nature obtains all that is its own?
Remember too on every occasion which leads you to vexation
to apply this principle: not that this is a misfortune, but that to
bear it nobly is good fortune.
42. It is a vulgar, but still a useful help towards contempt of
death, to pass in review those who have tenaciously stuck to
life. What more then have they gained than those who have
died early? Certainly they lie in their tombs somewhere at
last, Cadicianus, Fabius, Julianus, Lepidus, or any one else
like them, who have carried out many to be buried, and then
were carried out themselves. Altogether the interval is small
between birth and death; and consider with how much
trouble, and in company with what sort of people and in what
a feeble body this interval is laboriously passed. Do not then
consider life a thing of any value. For look to the immensity
of time behind you, and to the time which is before you,
another boundless space. In this infinity then what is the
difference between him who lives three days and him who
lives three generations?
43. Always run to the short way; and the short way is the
natural: accordingly say and do everything in conformity with
the soundest reason. For such a purpose frees a man from
trouble, and warfare, and all artifice and ostentatious display.

IV—51

V. BOOK FIVE
1. IN THE MORNING when you rise unwillingly, let this
thought be present—I am rising to the work of a human
being. Why then am I dissatisfied if I am going to do the
things for which I exist and for which I was brought into the
world? Or have I been made for this, to lie in the bed-clothes
and keep myself warm?—But this is more pleasant.—Do you
exist then to take your pleasure, and not at all for action or
exertion? Do you not see the little plants, the little birds, the
ants, the spiders, the bees working together to put in order
their several parts of the universe? And are you unwilling to
do the work of a human being, and do you not make haste to
do that which is according to your nature?—
But it is necessary to take rest also.—It is necessary: however
nature has fixed bounds to this too: she has fixed bounds both
to eating and drinking, and yet you go beyond these bounds,
beyond what is sufficient; yet in your acts it is not so, but you
stop short of what you can do. So you love not yourself, for if
you did, you would love your nature and her will. But those
who love their several arts exhaust themselves in working at
them, unwashed and without food; but you value your own
nature less than the turner values the turning art, or the dancer
the dancing art, or the lover of money values his money, or
the vainglorious man his little glory. And such men, when
they have a violent affection to a thing, choose neither to eat
nor to sleep rather than to perfect the things which they care
for. But are the acts which concern society more vile in your
eyes and less worthy of your labor?
2. How easy it is to repel and to wipe away every impression
V—52

which is troublesome or unsuitable, and immediately to be in
all tranquility.
3. Judge every word and deed which are according to nature
to be fit for you; and be not diverted by the blame which
follows from any people nor by their words, but if a thing is
good to be done or said, do not consider it unworthy of you.
For those persons have their peculiar leading principle and
follow their peculiar movement; which things do not of you
regard, but go straight on, following your own nature and the
common nature; and the way of both is one.
4. I go through the things which happen according to nature
until I shall fall and rest, breathing out my breath into that
element out of which I daily draw it in, and falling upon that
earth out of which my father collected the seed, and my
mother the blood, and my nurse the milk; out of which during
so many years I have been supplied with food and drink;
which bears me when I tread on it and abuse it for so many
purposes.
5. You say Men cannot admire the sharpness of your wits.—
Be it so: but there are many other things of which you cannot
say, I am not formed for them by nature. Show those qualities
then which are altogether in your power, sincerity, gravity,
endurance of labor, aversion to pleasure, contentment with
your portion and with few things, benevolence, frankness, no
love of superfluity, freedom from trifling magnanimity. Do
you not see how many qualities you are immediately able to
exhibit, in which there is no excuse of natural incapacity and
unfitness, and yet you still remain voluntarily below the

V—53

mark? Or are you compelled through being defectively
furnished by nature to murmur, and to be stingy, and to
flatter, and to find fault with your poor body, and to try to
please men, and to make great display, and to be so restless in
your mind? No, by the gods: but you might have been
delivered from these things long ago. Only if in truth you can
be charged with being rather slow and dull of comprehension,
you must exert yourself about this also, not neglecting it nor
yet taking pleasure in your dullness.
6. One man, when he has done a service to another, is ready
to set it down to his account as a favor conferred. Another is
not ready to do this, but still in his own mind he thinks of the
man as his debtor, and he knows what he has done. A third in
a manner does not even know what he has done, but he is like
a vine, which has produced grapes and seeks for nothing
more after it has once produced its proper fruit. As a horse
when he has run, a dog when he has tracked the game, a bee
when it has made the honey, so a man when he has done a
good act, does not call out for others to come and see, but he
goes on to another act, as a vine goes on to produce again the
grapes in season.—Must a man then be one of these, who in a
manner acts thus without observing it?—Yes.—
But this very thing is necessary, the observation of what a
man is doing: for it may be said, it is characteristic of the
social animal to perceive that he is working in a social
manner, and indeed to wish that his social partner also should
perceive it.—
It is true what you say, but you do not rightly understand
V—54

what is now said: and for this reason you will become one of
those of whom I spoke before, for even they are misled by a
certain show of reason. But if you will choose to understand
the meaning of what is said, do not fear that for this reason
you will omit any social act.
7. A prayer of the Athenians: Rain, rain, O dear Zeus, down
on the ploughed fields of the Athenians and on the plains.—
In truth we ought not to pray at all, or we ought to pray in this
simple and noble fashion.
8. Just as we must understand when it is said, That
Aesculapius prescribed to this man horse-exercise, or bathing
in cold water or going without shoes; so we must understand
it when it is said, that the nature of the universe prescribed to
this man disease or mutilation or loss, or anything else of the
kind.
For in the first case Prescribed means something like this: he
prescribed this for this man as a thing adapted to procure
health; and in the second case it means: That which happens
to (or, suits) every man is fixed in a manner for him suitably
to his destiny. For this is what we mean when we say that
things are suitable to us, as the workmen say of squared
stones in walls or the pyramids, that they are suitable, when
they fit them to one another in some kind of connection.
For there is altogether one fitness, harmony. And as the
universe is made up out of all bodies to be such a body as it
is, so out of all existing causes necessity (destiny) is made up
to be such a cause as it is. And even those who are completely
ignorant understand what I mean, for they say, It (necessity,
V—55

destiny) brought this to such a person.—This then was
brought and this was prescribed to him. Let us then receive
these things, as well as those which Aesculapius prescribes.
Many as a matter of course, even among his prescriptions are
disagreeable, but we accept them in the hope of health. Let
the perfecting and accomplishment of the things, which the
common nature judges to be good, be judged by you to be of
the same kind as your health. And so accept everything which
happens, even if it seem disagreeable, because it leads to this,
to the health of the universe and to the prosperity and felicity
of Zeus (the universe). For he would not have brought on any
man what he has brought, if it were not useful for the whole.
Neither does the nature of anything, whatever it may be,
cause anything which is not suitable to that which is directed
by it.
For two reasons then it is right to be content with that which
happens to you; the one, because it was done for you and
prescribed for you, and in a manner had reference to you,
originally from the most ancient causes spun with your
destiny; and the other, because even that which comes
severally to every man is to the power which administers the
universe a cause of felicity and perfection, nay even of its
very continuance.
For the integrity of the whole is mutilated, if you cut off
anything whatever from the conjunction and the continuity
either of the parts or of the causes. And you do cut off, as far
as it is in your power, when you are dissatisfied, and in a
manner you try to put anything out of the way.

V—56

9. Be not disgusted, nor discouraged, nor dissatisfied, if you
do not succeed in doing everything according to right
principles; but when you have failed, return back again, and
be content if the greater part of what you do is consistent with
man’s nature, and love this which you return to; and do not
return to philosophy as if she were a master, but act like those
who have sore eyes and apply a bit of sponge and egg, or as
another applies a plaster, or drenching with water. For thus
you will not fail to obey reason, and you will repose in it.
And remember that philosophy requires only the things which
your nature requires; but you would have something else
which is not according to nature.—It may be objected, Why
what is more agreeable than this which I am doing?—But is
not this the very reason why pleasure deceives us? And
consider if magnanimity, freedom, simplicity, equanimity,
and piety are not more agreeable. For what is more agreeable
than wisdom itself, when you think of the security and the
happy course of all things which depend on the faculty of
understanding and knowledge?
Things are in such a kind of envelopment, enclosure, that they
have seemed to philosophers, not a few, nor those common
philosophers, altogether unintelligible; nay even to the Stoics
themselves they seem difficult to understand. And all our
assent is changeable; for where is the man who never
changes? Carry your thoughts then to the objects themselves,
and consider how short-lived they are and worthless, and that
they may be in the possession of a filthy wretch or a whore or
a robber. Then turn to the morals of those who live with you,
and it is hardly possible to endure even the most agreeable of
them, to say nothing of a man being hardly able to endure
V—57

himself. In such darkness then and dirt and in so constant a
flux both of substance and of time, and of motion and of
things moved, what there is worth being highly prized or even
an object of serious pursuit, I cannot imagine.
10. But on the contrary it is a man’s duty to comfort himself,
and to wait for the natural dissolution and not to be vexed at
the delay, but to rest in these principles only: the one, that
nothing will happen to me which is not conformable to the
nature of the universe; and the other, that it is in my power
never to act contrary to my god and daemon: for there is no
man who will compel me to this.
11. About what am I now employing my own soul? On every
occasion I must ask myself this question, and inquire, what
have I now in this part of me, which they call the ruling
principle? And whose soul have I now? That of a child, or of
a young man, or of a feeble woman, or of a tyrant, or of a
domestic animal, or of a wild beast?
12. What kind of things those are which appear good to the
many, we may learn even from this. For if any man should
conceive certain things as being really good, such as
prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude, he would not after
having first conceived these, endure to listen to anything
which should not be in harmony with what is really good. But
if a man has first conceived as good the things which appear
to the many to be good, he will listen and readily receive as
very applicable that which was said by the comic writer. Thus
even the many perceive the difference. For were it not so, this
saying would not offend, and would not be rejected in the
V—58

first case, while we receive it when it is said of wealth, and of
the means which further the luxury and fame, as said fitly and
wittily. Go on then and ask if we should value and think those
things to be good, to which after their first conception in the
mind, the words of the comic writer might be aptly applied—
that he who has them, through pure abundance, has not a
place to ease himself in. (modern colloquial, “pot to piss in”)
13. I am composed of the formal (causal) and the material;
and neither of them will perish into non-existence, as neither
of them came into existence out of non-existence. Every part
of me then will be reduced by change into some part of the
universe, and that again will change into another part of the
universe, and so on forever. And by consequence of such a
change I too exist, and those who begot me, and so on forever
in the other direction. For nothing hinders us from saying so,
even if the universe is administered according to definite
periods of revolution.
14. Reason and the reasoning art (philosophy) are powers
which are sufficient for themselves and for their own works.
They move then from a first principle which is their own, and
they make their way to the end which is proposed to them;
and this is the reason why such acts are named catorthoseis or
right acts, which word signifies that they proceed by the right
road.
None of these things ought to be called a man’s, which do not
belong to a man, as man. They are not required of a man, nor
does man’s nature promise them, nor are they the means of
man’s nature attaining its end. Neither then does the end of
V—59

man lie in these things, nor yet that which aids to the
accomplishment of this end, and that which aids towards this
end is that which is good. Besides, if any of these things did
belong to man, it would not be right for a man to despise
them and to set himself against them; nor would a man be
worthy of praise who showed that he did not want these
things, nor would he who stinted himself in any of them be
good, if indeed these things were good. But now the more of
these things a man deprives himself of, or of other things like
them, or even when he is deprived of any of them, the more
patiently he endures the loss, just in the same degree he is a
better man.
15. Such as are your habitual thoughts, such also will be the
character of your mind; for the soul is dyed by the thoughts.
Dye it then with a continuous series of such thoughts as these:
for instance, that where a man can live, there he can also live
well. But he must live in a palace;—well then, he can also
live well in a palace. And again, consider that for whatever
purpose each thing has been constituted, for this it has been
constituted, and towards this it is carried; and its end is in that
towards which it is carried; and where the end is, there also is
the advantage and the good of each thing. Now the good for
the animal with reason is society; for that we are made for
society has been shown above. Is it not plain that the inferior
exist for the sake of the superior? But the things which have
life are superior to those which have not life, and of those
which have life, the superior are those which have reason.
16. To seek what is impossible is madness: and it is
impossible that the bad should not do something of its kind.
V—60

Nothing happens to any man which he is not formed by
nature to bear. The same things happen to another, and either
because he does not see that they have happened, or because
he would show a great spirit, he is firm and remains
unharmed. It is a shame then that often ignorance and conceit
should seem stronger than wisdom.
Things themselves touch not the soul, not in the least degree;
nor have they admission to the soul, nor can they turn or
move the soul: but the soul turns and moves itself alone.
Whatever judgments it may think proper to make, it can make
for itself, from the things which present themselves to it.
17. In one respect man is the nearest thing to me, so far as I
must do good to men and endure them. But so far as some
men make themselves obstacles to my proper acts, man
becomes to me one of the things which are indifferent, no less
than the sun or wind or a wild beast. Now it is true that these
may impede my action, but they are no impediments to my
affects and disposition, which have the power of acting
conditionally and changing: for the mind converts and
changes every hindrance to its activity into an aid; and so that
which is a hindrance is made a furtherance to an act; and that
which is an obstacle on the road helps us on this road.
18. Reverence that which is best in the universe; and this is
that which makes use of all things and directs all things. And
in like manner also reverence that which is best in yourself;
and this is of the same kind as that. For in yourself also, that
which makes use of everything else is this, and your life is
directed by this.
V—61

19. That which does no harm to the state, does no harm to the
citizen. In the case of every appearance of harm apply this
rule: if the state is not harmed by this, neither am I harmed.
But if the state is harmed, you must not be angry with him
who does harm to the state. Show him where his error is.
Often think of the rapidity with which things pass by and
disappear, both the things which are and the things which are
produced. For substance is like a river in a continual flow,
and the activities of things are in constant change, and the
causes work in infinite varieties; and there is hardly anything
which stands still. And consider this which is near to you, this
boundless abyss of the past and of the future in which all
things disappear. How then is he not a fool who is puffed up
with such things or plagued about them and makes himself
miserable? for they vex him only for a time, and a short time.
Think of the universal substance, of which you have a very
small portion; and of universal time, of which a short and
indivisible interval has been assigned to you; and of that
which is fixed by destiny, and how small a part of it you are.
Does another do me wrong? Let him look to it. He has his
own disposition, his own activity. I now have what the
universal nature wills me to have; and I do what my nature
now wills me to do.
20. Let the part of your soul which leads and governs be
undisturbed by the movements in the flesh, whether of
pleasure or of pain; and let it not unite with them, but let it
circumscribe itself and limit those affects to their parts. But
when these affects rise up to the mind, by virtue of that other
V—62

sympathy that naturally exists in a body which is all one, then
you must not strive to resist the sensation, for it is natural: but
let not the ruling part of itself add to the sensation, the
opinion that it is either good or bad.
21. Live with the gods. And he does live with the gods who
constantly shows to them, his own soul is satisfied with that
which is assigned to him, and that it does all that the daemon
wishes, which Zeus hath given to every man for his guardian
and guide, a portion of himself. And this is every man’s
understanding and reason.
22. Are you angry with him whose armpits stink? Are you
angry with him whose mouth smells foul? What good will
this anger do you? He has such a mouth, he has such armpits:
it is necessary that such an emanation must come from such
things—but the man has reason, it will be said, and he is able,
if he takes pain to discover wherein he offends—I wish you
well of your discovery. Well then, and you have reason: by
your rational faculty stir up his rational faculty; show him his
error, admonish him. For if he listens, you will cure him, and
there is no need of anger.
23. Neither tragic actor nor whore... As you intend to live
when you are gone out,...so it is in your power to live here.
But if men do not permit you, then get away out of life, yet so
as if you were suffering no harm. The house is smoky, and I
quit it. Why do you think that this is any trouble? But so long
as nothing of the kind drives me out, I remain, am free, and
no man shall hinder me from doing what I choose; and I
choose to do what is according to the nature of the rational
V—63

and social animal.
24. The intelligence of the universe is social. Accordingly it
has made the inferior things for the sake of the superior, and
it has fitted the superior to one another. You see how it has
subordinated, coordinated and assigned to everything its
proper portion, and has brought together into concord with
one another the things which are the best.
25. How have you behaved up until now to the gods, your
parents, brethren, children, teachers, to those who looked
after your infancy, to your friends, kinsfolk, to your slaves?
Consider if you have hitherto behaved to all in such a way
that this may be said of you: Never has wronged a man in
word or deed.
26. And call to recollection both how many things you have
passed through, and how many things you have been able to
endure: and that the history of your life is now complete and
your service is ended: and how many beautiful things you
have seen: and how many pleasures and pains you have
despised; and how many things called honorable you have
spurned; and to how many ill-minded folks you have shown a
kind disposition.
Why do unskilled and ignorant souls disturb him who has
skill and knowledge? What soul then has skill and
knowledge? That which knows beginning and end, and
knows the reason, which pervades all substance and through
all time by fixed periods (revolutions) administers the
universe.

V—64

27. Soon, very soon, you will be ashes, or a skeleton, and
either a name or not even a name; but name is sound and
echo. And the things which are much valued in life are empty
and rotten and trifling, and like little dogs biting one another,
and little children quarrelling, laughing, and then straightway
weeping. But fidelity and modesty and justice and truth have
fled up to Olympus from the wide-spread earth.
What then is there which still detains you here? If the objects
of sense are easily changed and never stand still, and the
organs of perception are dull and easily receive false
impressions; and the poor soul itself is an exhalation from
blood. But to have good repute amidst such a world as this is
an empty thing. Why then do you not wait in tranquility for
your end, whether it is extinction or removal to another state?
And until that time comes, what is sufficient? Why, what else
than to venerate the gods and bless them, and to do good to
men, and to practice tolerance and self-restraint; but as to
everything which is beyond the limits of the poor flesh and
breath, to remember that this is neither yours nor in your
power.
28. You can pass your life in an equable flow of happiness, if
you can go by the right way, and think and act in the right
way. These two things are common both to the soul of God
and to the soul of man, and to the soul of every rational being,
not to be hindered by another; and to hold good, to consist in
the disposition to justice and the practice of it, and in this to
let your desire find its termination.
29. If this is neither my own badness, nor an effect of my own
V—65

badness, and the common weal (commonwealth) is not
injured, why am I troubled about it? And what is the harm to
the common weal?
Do not be carried along inconsiderately by the appearance of
things, but give help to all according to your ability and their
fitness; and if they should have sustained loss in matters
which are indifferent, do not imagine this to be a damage. For
it is a bad habit. But as the old man in the comic play when he
went away, asked back his foster-child’s rattle top, or
rhombus remembering that it was only a top, so do you in this
case do likewise.
30. When you are calling out on the Rostra, (death) have you
forgotten what these things are?—Yes; but they are objects of
great concern to these people—will you too then be made a
fool for these things?—I was once a fortunate man, but I lost
it, I know not how.—But fortunate means that a man has
assigned to himself a good fortune: and a good fortune is
good disposition of the soul, good emotions, good actions.

VI. BOOK SIX
1. THE SUBSTANCE of the universe is obedient and
compliant; and the reason which governs it has in itself no
cause for doing evil, for it has no malice, nor does it do evil
to anything, nor is anything harmed by it. But all things are
made and perfected according to this reason.
VI—66

2. Let it make no difference to you whether you are cold or
warm, if you are doing your duty; and whether you are
exhausted or satisfied with sleep; and whether ill-spoken of or
praised; and whether dying or doing something else. For it is
one of the acts of life, this act by which we die: it is sufficient
then in this act also to do well what we have in hand.
3. Look within. Let neither the peculiar quality of anything
nor its value escape you.
4. All existing things soon change, and they will either be
reduced to vapor, if indeed all substance is one, or they will
be dispersed. The reason which governs knows what its own
disposition is, and what it does, and on what material it
works.
5. The best way of avenging yourself is not to become like
the wrong doer.
6. Take pleasure in one thing and rest in it, in passing from
one social act to another social act, thinking of God.
7. The ruling principle is that which rouses and turns itself,
and while it makes itself such as it is and such as it wills to
be, it also makes everything which happens appear to itself to
be such as it wills.
8. In conformity to the nature of the universe every single
thing is accomplished, for certainly it is not in conformity to
any other nature that each thing is accomplished, neither a
nature which externally comprehends this, nor a nature which
is comprehended within this nature, nor a nature external and
independent of this.
VI—67

The universe is either a confusion, and a mutual involution
(entangling involvement) of things, and a dispersion; or it is
unity and order and providence. If then it is the former, why
do I desire to tarry in a fortuitous combination of things and
such a disorder? And why do I care about anything else than
how I shall at last become earth? And why am I disturbed, for
the dispersion of my elements will happen whatever I do. But
if the other supposition is true, I venerate, and I am firm, and
I trust in him who governs.
9. When you have been compelled by circumstances to be
disturbed in a manner, quickly return to yourself and do not
continue out of tune longer than the compulsion lasts; for you
will have more mastery over the harmony by continually
recurring to it.
10. If you had a step-mother and a mother at the same time,
you would be dutiful to your step-mother, but still you would
constantly return to your mother. Let the court and
philosophy now be to you step-mother and mother: return to
philosophy frequently and repose in her, through whom what
you meet with in the court appears to you tolerable, and you
appear tolerable in the court.
11. When we have meat before us and such eatables we
receive the impression, that this is the dead body of a fish,
and this is the dead body of a bird or of a pig; and again, that
this Falernian (wine from Campania) is only a little grape
juice, and this purple robe some sheep’s wool dyed with the
blood of a shell-fish: such then are these impressions, and
they reach the things themselves and penetrate them, and so
VI—68

we see what kind of things they are. Just in the same way
ought we to act all through life, and where there are things
which appear most worthy of our approbation, we ought to
lay them bare and look at their worthlessness and strip them
of all the words by which they are exalted. For outward show
is a wonderful perversion of the reason, and when you are
most sure that you are employed about things worth your
pains, it is then that it cheats you most.
12. Consider then what Crates says of Xenocrates himself.
13. Most of the things which the multitude admire are
referred to objects of the most general kind, those which are
held together by cohesion or natural organization, such as
stones, wood, fig-trees, vines, olives. But those which are
admired by men who are a little more reasonable are referred
to the things which are held together by a living principle,
such as flocks, herds. Those which are admired by men who
are still more instructed are the things which are held together
by a rational soul, not however a universal soul, but rational
so far as it is a soul skilled in some art, or expert in some
other way, or simply rational so far as it possesses a number
of slaves. But he who values rational soul, a soul universal
and fitted for political life, regards nothing else except this
rational soul; and above all things he keeps his soul in a
condition and in an activity conformable to reason and social
life, and he cooperates to this end with those who are of the
same kind as himself.
14. Some things are hurrying into existence, and others are
hurrying out of it; and of that which is coming into existence
VI—69

part is already extinguished. Motions and changes are
continually renewing the world, just as the uninterrupted
course of time is always renewing the infinite duration of the
ages. In this flowing stream then, on which there is no
abiding, what is there of the things which hurry by, on which
a man would set a high price? It would be just as if a man
should fall in love with one of the sparrows which fly by, but
it has already passed out of sight. Something of this kind is
the very life of every man, like the exhalation of the blood
and the respiration of the air. For such as it is to have once
drawn in the air and to have given it back, which we do every
moment, just the same is it with the whole respiratory power,
which you did receive at your birth yesterday and the day
before, to give it back to the elements from which you did
first draw it.
15. Neither is transpiration, as in plants, a thing to be valued,
nor respiration, as in domesticated animals and wild beasts,
nor the receiving of impressions by the appearances of things,
nor being moved by desires as puppets by strings, nor
assembling in herds, nor being nourished by food; for this is
just like the act of separating and parting with the useless part
of our food (to defecate). What then is worth being valued?
To be received with clapping of hands? No. Neither must we
value the clapping of tongues, for the praise which comes
from the many is a clapping of tongues. Suppose then that
you have given up this worthless thing called fame, what
remains that is worth valuing? This in my opinion, to move
yourself and to restrain yourself in conformity to your proper
constitution, to which end, both all employments and all arts
lead. For every art aims at this, that the thing which has been
VI—70

made should be adapted to the work for which it has been
made; and both the vine-planter who looks after the vine, and
the horse-breaker, and he who trains the dog, seek this end.
But the education and the teaching of youth aim at something.
In this then is the value of the education and the teaching.
And if this is well, you will not seek anything else.
Will you not cease to value many other things too? Then you
will be neither free, nor sufficient for your own happiness,
nor without passion. For of necessity you must be envious,
jealous, and suspicious of those who can take away those
things, and plot against those who have that which is valued
by you. Of necessity a man must be altogether in a state of
perturbation who wants any of these things; and besides, he
must often find fault with the gods. But to reverence and
honor your own mind will make you content with yourself,
and in harmony with society, and in agreement with the gods,
that is, praising all that they give and have ordered.
16. Above, below, all around are the movements of the
elements. But the motion of virtue is in none of these: it is
something more divine, and advancing by a way hardly
observed, it goes happily on its road.
17. How strangely men act. They will not praise those who
are living at the same time and living with themselves; but to
be themselves praised by posterity, by those whom they have
never seen or never will see, this they set much value on. But
this is very much the same as if you should be grieved
because those who have lived before you did not praise you.
18. If a thing is difficult to be accomplished by yourself, do
VI—71

not think that it is impossible for man: but if anything is
possible for man and conformable to his nature, think that this
can be attained by you too.
19. In the gymnastic exercises suppose that a man has torn
you with his nails, and by dashing against your head has
inflicted a wound. Well, we neither show any signs of
vexation, nor are we offended, nor do we suspect him
afterwards as a treacherous fellow; and yet we are on our
guard against him, not however as an enemy, nor yet with
suspicion, but we quietly get out of his way. Something like
this let your behavior be in all the other parts of life; let us
overlook many things in those who are like antagonists in the
gymnasium. For it is in our power, as I said, to get out of the
way, and to have no suspicion nor hatred.
20. If any man is able to convince me and show me that I do
not think or act right, I will gladly change; for I seek the truth
by which no man was ever injured. But he is injured who
abides only in his error and ignorance.
21. I do my duty: other things trouble me not; for they are
either things without life, or things without reason, or things
that have rambled and know not the way.
As to the animals which have no reason and generally all
things and objects, since you have reason and they have none,
do you make use of them with a generous and liberal spirit.
But towards human beings, as they have reason, behave in a
social spirit. And on all occasions call on the gods, and do not
perplex yourself about the length of time in which you shall
do this; for even three hours so spent are sufficient.
VI—72

22. Alexander the Macedonian and his groom, by death were
brought to the same state; for either they were received
among the same seminal principles of the universe, or they
were alike dispersed among the atoms.
23. Consider how many things in the same indivisible time
take place in each of us, things which concern the body and
things which concern the soul: and so you will not wonder if
many more things, or rather all things which come into
existence in that which is the one and all, which we call
Cosmos, exist in it at the same time.
24. If any man should propose to you the question, how the
name Antoninus is written, would you with a straining of the
voice utter each letter? What then if they grow angry, will
you be angry too? Will you not go on with composure and
number every letter? Just so, then in this life also remember
that every duty is made up of certain parts. These it is your
duty to observe and without being disturbed or showing anger
towards those who are angry with you, to go on your way and
finish that which is set before you.
25. How cruel it is not to allow men to strive after the things
which appear to them to be suitable to their nature, and
profitable! And yet in a manner you do not allow them to do
this when you are vexed because they do wrong. For they are
certainly moved towards things because they suppose them to
be suitable to their nature and profitable to them.—But if it is
not so.—Teach them then, and show them without being
angry.
26. Death is a cessation of the impressions through the
VI—73

senses, and cessation of the pulling of the strings which move
the appetites, and of the discursive movements of the
thoughts, and of the service to the flesh.
27. It is a shame for the soul to be first to give way
(dementia) in this life, when your body does not give way.
Take care that you are not made into a Caesar, that you are
not dyed with this dye; for such things happen. Keep yourself
then simple, good, pure, serious, free from affectation, a
friend of justice, a worshipper of the gods, kind, affectionate,
strenuous in all proper acts. Strive to continue to be such as
philosophy wished to make you. Revere the gods, and help
men. Short is life. There is only one fruit of this terrene life, a
pious disposition and social acts.
28. Do everything as a disciple of Antoninus. Remember his
constancy in every act which was conformable to reason, and
his evenness in all things, and his piety, and the serenity of
his countenance, and his sweetness, and his disregard of
empty fame, and his efforts to understand things; and how he
would never let anything pass without having first most
carefully examined it and clearly understood it; and how he
bore with those who blamed him unjustly without blaming
them in return; how he did nothing in a hurry; and how he
listened not to calumnies, and how exact an examiner of
manners and actions he was; and not given to reproach
people, nor timid, nor suspicious, nor a sophist; and with how
little he was satisfied, such as lodging, bed, dress, food,
servants; and how laborious and patient; and how he was able
on account of his sparing diet to hold out to the evening, not
VI—74

even requiring to relieve himself by any evacuations except at
the usual hour; and his firmness and uniformity in his
friendships; and how he tolerated freedom of speech in those
who opposed his opinions; and the pleasure that he had when
any man showed him anything better; and how religious he
was without superstition. Imitate all this that you may have as
good a conscience, when your last hour comes, as he had.
29. Return to your sober senses and call yourself back; and
when you have roused yourself from sleep and have
perceived that they were only dreams which troubled you,
now in your waking hours look at these (the things about you)
as you did look at those (in the dreams).
30. I consist of a little body and a soul. Now to this little body
all things are indifferent, for it is not able to perceive
differences. But to the understanding those things only are
indifferent which are not the works of its own activity. But
whatever things are the works of its own activity, all these are
in its power. And of these however, only those which are
done with reference to the present; for as to the future and the
past activities of the mind, even these are for the present
indifferent. (define his use of indifferent, not in your power.)
31. Neither the labor which the hand does nor that of the foot
is contrary to nature, so long as the foot does the foot’s work
and the hand the hand’s. So then neither for a man, as a man’s
labor is not contrary to nature so long as it does the things of
a man. But if the labor is not contrary to his nature, neither is
it an evil to him. How many pleasures have been enjoyed by
robbers, patricides, and tyrants.
VI—75

32. Do you not see how the handicraftsmen accommodate
themselves up to a certain point to those who are not skilled
in their craft—nevertheless they cling to the reason (the
principles) of their art and do not endure to depart from it? Is
it not strange if the architect and the physician shall have
more respect to the reason (the principles) of their own arts
than man to his own reason, which is common to him and to
the gods?
33. Asia and Europe are corners of the universe: all the sea a
drop in the universe; Athos a little clod of the universe: all the
present time is a point in eternity. All things are little,
changeable, perishable. All things come from thence, from
that universal ruling power either directly proceeding or by
way of sequence. And accordingly the lion’s gaping jaws, and
that which is poisonous, and every harmful thing, as a thorn,
as mud, are after-products of the grand and beautiful. Do not
then imagine that they are of another kind from that which
you do venerate, but form a just opinion of the source of all.
34. He who has seen present things has seen all, both
everything which has taken place from all eternity and
everything which will be for time without end; for all things
are of one kin and of one form.
Frequently consider the connection of all things in the
universe and their relation to one another. For in a manner all
things are implicated with one another, and all in this way are
friendly to one another; for one thing comes in order after
another, and this is by virtue of the active movement and
mutual conspiration and the unity of the substance.
VI—76

35. Adapt yourself to the things with which your lot has been
cast: and to the men among whom you have received your
portion, love them, but do it truly, sincerely.
Every instrument, tool, vessel, if it does that for which it has
been made, it is well, and yet he who made it is not there. But
in the things which are held together by nature there is within
and there abides in them the power which made them;
wherefore the more is it fit to reverence this power, and to
think that, if you do live and act according to its will,
everything in you is in conformity to intelligence. And thus
also in the universe, the things which belong to it are in
conformity to intelligence.
36. Whatever of the things which are not within your power
you shall suppose to be good for you or evil, it must of
necessity be that, if such a bad thing befalls you or the loss of
such a good thing, you will blame the gods, and hate men too,
those who are the cause of the misfortune or the loss, or those
who are suspected of being likely to be the cause; and indeed
we do much injustice, because we make a difference between
these things. But if we judge only those things which are in
our power to be good or bad, there remains no reason either
for finding fault with God or standing in a hostile attitude to
man.
37. We are all working together to one end, some with
knowledge and design, and others without knowing what they
do; as men also when they are asleep, of whom it is
Heraclitus I think, who says that they are laborers and
cooperators in the things which take place in the universe.
VI—77

But men cooperate after different fashions: and even those
who cooperate abundantly, those who find fault with what
happens, and those who try to oppose it and to hinder it; for
the universe has need even of such men as these. It remains
then for you to understand among what kind of workmen you
place yourself; for he who rules all things will certainly make
a right use of you, and he will receive you among some part
of the cooperators and of those whose labors conduce to one
end. But be not you such a part as the mean and ridiculous
verse in the play, which Chrysippus speaks of.
38. Does the sun undertake to do the work of the rain, or
Aesculapius the work of the Fruit-bearer (the earth)? And
how is it with respect to each of the stars, are they not
different and yet they work together to the same end?
39. If the gods have determined about me and about the
things which must happen to me, they have determined well,
for it is not easy even to imagine a deity without forethought;
and as to doing me harm, why should they have any desire
towards that? For what advantage would result to them from
this or to the whole, which is the special object of their
providence? But if they have not determined about me
individually, they have certainly determined about the whole
at least, and the things which happen by way of sequence in
this general arrangement, I ought to accept with pleasure and
to be content with them. But if they determine about
nothing—which it is wicked to believe, or if we do believe it,
let us neither sacrifice nor pray nor swear by them nor do
anything else which we do as if the gods were present and
lived with us—but if however the gods determine about none
VI—78

of the things which concern us, I am able to determine about
myself, and I can inquire about that which is useful; and that
is useful to every man which is conformable to his own
constitution and nature. But my nature is rational and social;
and my city and country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome,
but so far as I am a man, it is the world. The things then
which are useful to these cities are alone useful to me.
Whatever happens to every man, this is for the interest of the
universal: this might be sufficient.
40. But further you will observe this also as a general truth, if
you observe that whatever is profitable to any man is
profitable also to other men. But let the word profitable be
taken here in the common sense as said of things of the
middle kind, neither good nor bad.
41. As it happens to you in the amphitheater and such places,
that the continual sight of the same things and the uniformity
make the spectacle wearisome, so it is in the whole of life; for
all things above and below are the same and from the same.
How long then?
42. Think continually that all kinds of men and of all kinds of
pursuits and of all nations are dead, so that your thoughts
come down even to Philistion and Phoebus and Origanion.
Now turn your thoughts to the other kinds of men. To that
place then we must remove, where there are so many great
orators, and so many noble philosophers, Heraclitus,
Pythagoras, Socrates; so many heroes of former days, and so
many generals after them, and tyrants; besides these,
Eudoxus, Hipparchus, Archimedes, and other men of acute
VI—79

natural talents, great minds, lovers of labor, versatile,
confident, mockers even of the perishable and ephemeral life
of man, as Menippus and such as are like him. As to all these
consider that they have long been in the dust. What harm then
is this to them; and what to those whose names are altogether
unknown? One thing here is worth a great deal, to pass your
life in truth and justice, with a benevolent disposition even to
liars and unjust men.
43. When you wish to delight yourself, think of the virtues of
those who live with you; for instance, the activity of one, and
the modesty of another, and the liberality of a third, and some
other good quality of a fourth. For nothing delights so much
as the examples of the virtues, when they are exhibited in the
morals of those who live with us and present themselves in
abundance as far as is possible. Wherefore we must keep
them before us.
44. You are not dissatisfied, I suppose, because you weigh
only so many kilos and not three hundred. Be not dissatisfied
then that you must live only so many years and not more; for
as you are satisfied with the amount of substance which has
been assigned to you, so be content with the amount of time.
45. Let us try to persuade them (men). But act even against
their will, when the principles of justice lead that way. If
however any man by using force stands in your way, betake
yourself to contentment and tranquility, and at the same time
employ the hindrance towards the exercise of some other
virtue; and remember that your attempt was with a
reservation, that you did not desire to do impossibilities.
VI—80

What then did you desire?—Some such effort as this.—But
you attained your object, if the things to which you were
moved are accomplished.
46. He who loves fame considers another man’s activity to be
his own good; and he who loves pleasure, his own sensations;
but he who has understanding considers his own acts to be his
own good.
47. It is within our power to have no opinion about a thing,
and not to be disturbed in our soul; for things themselves
have no natural power to form our judgments.
48. Accustom yourself to attend carefully to what is said by
another, and as much as it is possible, be in the speaker’s
mind.
49. That which is not good for the swarm, neither is it good
for the bee.
50. If sailors abused the helmsman or if the sick abused the
doctor, would they listen to anybody else; or how could the
helmsman secure the safety of those in the ship or the doctor
secure the health of those whom he attends?
51. How many together with whom I came into the world are
already gone out of it.
52. To the jaundiced, honey tastes bitter, and to those bitten
by mad dogs water causes fear; and to little children the ball
is a fine thing. Why then am I angry? Do you think that a
false opinion has less power than the bile in the jaundiced or
the poison in him who is bitten by a mad dog?
VI—81

53. No man will hinder you from living according to the
reasoning of your own nature: nothing will happen to you
contrary to the reason of the universal nature.
54. What kind of people are those whom men wish to please,
and for what objects, and by what kind of acts? How soon
will time cover all things; how many it has covered already.

VII. BOOK SEVEN
1. WHAT IS BADNESS? It is that which you have often
seen. And on the occasion of everything which happens keep
this in mind, that it is that which you have often seen.
Everywhere up and down you will find the same things, with
which the old histories are filled, those of the middle ages and
those of our own day; with which cities and houses are filled
now. There is nothing new: all things are both familiar and
short-lived.
2. How can our principles become dead, unless the
impressions (thoughts) which correspond to them are
extinguished? But it is in your power to continuously fan
these thoughts into a flame. I can have that opinion about
anything, which I ought to have. If I can, why am I disturbed?
The things which are external to my mind have no relation at
all to my mind.—Let this be the state of your affects, and you
stand erect. To recover your life is within your power. Look
at things again as you used to look at them; for in this consists
VII—82

the recovery of your life.
3. The idle business of show, plays on the stage, flocks of
sheep, herds, exercises with spears, a bone cast to little dogs,
a bit of bread into fish-ponds, then labors of ants and burdencarrying, the running about of frightened little mice, puppets
pulled by strings all alike. It is your duty then in the midst of
such things to show good humor and not a proud air; to
understand however that every man is worth just so much as
the things are worth about which he busies himself.
4. In discourse you must attend to what is said, and in every
movement you must observe what is doing. And in the one
you should see immediately to what end it refers, but in the
other watch carefully what is the thing signified.
5. Is my understanding sufficient for this or not? If it is
sufficient, I use it for the work as an instrument given by the
universal nature. But if it is not sufficient, then either I retire
from the work and give way to him who is able to do it better,
unless there be some reason why I ought not to do so; or I do
it as well as I can, taking to help me the man who with the aid
of my ruling principle can do what is now fit and useful for
the general good.
For whatsoever either by myself or with another I can do,
ought to be directed to this only, to that which is useful and
well suited to society.
How many after being celebrated by fame have been given up
to oblivion; and how many who have celebrated the fame of
others have long since been dead.
VII—83

Be not ashamed to be helped; for it is your business to do
your duty like a soldier in the assault on a town. How then if
being lame you cannot mount up on the battlements alone,
but with the help of another it is possible?
6. Let not future things disturb you, for you will come to
them, if it shall be necessary, having with you the same
reason which now you use for present things.
All things are implicated with one another, and the bond is
holy; and there is hardly anything unconnected with any other
thing. For things have been coordinated, and they combine to
form the same universe (order). For there is one universe
made up of all things, and one God who pervades all things,
and one substance, and one law, one common reason in all
intelligent animals, and one truth; if indeed there is also one
perfection for all animals which are of the same stock and
participate in the same reason.
7. Everything material soon disappears in the substance of the
whole; and everything formal (causal) is very soon taken
back into the universal reason; and the memory of everything
is very soon overwhelmed in time.
8. To the rational animal the same act is according to nature
and according to reason.
9. Be you erect yourself, not to be made erect.
10. Just as it is with the members in those bodies which are
united in one, so it is with rational beings which exist
separate, for they have been constituted for one cooperation.
VII—84

And the perception of this will be more apparent to you, if
you often say to yourself that I am a member (melos) of the
system of rational beings. But if (using the letter r) you say
that you are a part (meros) you do not yet love men from your
heart; beneficence does not yet delight you for its own sake;
you still do it barely as a thing of propriety, and not yet as
doing good to yourself.
11. Let there fall externally what will on the parts which can
feel the effects of this fall. For those parts which have felt
will complain, if they choose. But I, unless I think that what
has happened is an evil, I am not injured. And it is in my
power not to think so.
12. Whatever any one does or says, I must be good, just as if
the gold, or the emerald, or the purple were always saying
this, whatever any one does or says, I must be emerald and
keep my color.
13. The ruling faculty does not disturb itself; I mean, does not
frighten itself or cause itself pain. But if any one else can
frighten or pain it, let him do so. For the faculty itself will not
by its own opinion turn itself into such ways. Let the body
itself take care, if it can, that it is suffering nothing, and let it
speak if it suffers. But the soul itself, that which is subject to
fear, to pain, which has completely the power of forming an
opinion about these things, will suffer nothing, for it will
never deviate into such a judgment. The leading principle in
itself wants nothing, unless it makes a want for itself; and
therefore it is both free from perturbation and unimpeded, if it
does not disturb and impede itself.
VII—85

14. Eudaemonia (happiness) is a good daemon, or a good
thing. What then are you doing here, O imagination? Go
away, I entreat you by the gods, as you did come, for I want
you not. But you have come according to your old fashion. I
am not angry with you: only go away.
15. Is any man afraid of change? Why what can take place
without change? What then is more pleasing or more suitable
to the universal nature? And can you take a bath unless the
wood undergoes a change? And can you be nourished, unless
the food undergoes a change? And can anything else that is
useful be accomplished without change? Do you not see then
that for yourself also to change is just the same, and equally
necessary for the universal nature?
16. Through the universal substance as through a furious
torrent all bodies are carried, being by their nature united with
and cooperating with the whole, as the parts of our body with
one another. How many a Chrysippus, how many a Socrates,
how many an Epictetus has time already swallowed up? And
let the same thought occur to you with reference to every man
and everything.
One thing only troubles me, lest I should do something which
the constitution of man does not allow, or in the way which it
does not allow, or what it does not allow now.
Near is your forgetfulness of all things; and near the
forgetfulness of you by all.
It is peculiar to man to love even those who do wrong. And
this happens, if when they do wrong it occurs to you that they
VII—86

are kinsmen, and that they do wrong through ignorance and
unintentionally, and that soon both of you will die; and above
all, that the wrong-doer has done you no harm, for he has not
made your ruling faculty worse than it was before.
17. The universal nature out of the universal substance, as if it
were wax, now molds a horse, and when it has broken this up,
it uses the material for a tree, then for a man, then for
something else; and each of these things subsists for a very
short time. But it is no hardship for the vessel to be broken
up, just as there was none in its being fastened together.
18. A scowling look is altogether unnatural; when it is often
assumed, the result is that all comeliness dies away, and at
last is so completely extinguished that it cannot be again
lighted up at all. Try to conclude from this very fact that it is
contrary to reason. For if even the perception of doing wrong
shall depart, what reason is there for living any longer?
Nature which governs the whole will soon change all things
which you see, and out of their substance will make other
things, and again other things from the substance of them, in
order that the world may be ever new.
19. When a man has done you any wrong, immediately
consider with what your opinion about good or evil he has
done wrong. For when you have seen this, you will pity him,
and will neither wonder nor be angry. For either you yourself
think the same thing to be good that he does, or another thing
of the same kind. It is your duty then to pardon him. But if
you do not think such things to be good or evil, you will more
readily be well disposed to him who is in error.
VII—87

20. Think not so much of what you have not, as of what you
have: but of the things which you have, select the best, and
then reflect how eagerly they would have been sought, if you
had them not. At the same time however take care that you do
not through being so pleased with them accustom yourself to
overvalue them, so as to be disturbed if ever you should not
have them.
Retire into yourself. The rational principle which rules has
this nature, that it is content with itself when it does what is
just, and so secures tranquility.
21. Wipe out the imagination. Stop the pulling of the strings.
Confine yourself to the present. Understand well what
happens either to you or to another. Divide and distribute
every object into the causal (formal) and the material. Think
of your last hour. Let the wrong which is done by a man stay
there, where the wrong was done.
Direct your attention to what is said. Let your understanding
enter into the things that are doing, and the things which do
them.
22. Adorn yourself with simplicity and modesty and with
indifference towards the things which lie between virtue and
vice. Love mankind. Follow God. The poet says that Law
rules all.—And it is enough to remember that Law rules all.
About death: Whether it is a dispersion, or a resolution into
atoms, or annihilation, it is either extinction or change.
About pain: The pain which is intolerable carries us off; but
VII—88

that which lasts a long time is tolerable; and the mind
maintains its own tranquility by retiring into itself, and the
ruling faculty is not made worse. But the parts which are
harmed by pain, let them if they can, give their opinion about
it.
About fame: Look at the minds of those who seek fame,
observe what they are, and what kind of things they avoid,
and what kind of things they pursue. And consider that as the
heaps of sand piled on one another hide the former sands, so
in life the events which go before are soon covered by those
which come after.
23. From Plato: The man who has an elevated mind and takes
a view of all time and of all substance, do you suppose it
possible for him to think that human life is anything great? it
is not possible, he said.—Such a man then will think that
death also is no evil.— Certainly not.
24. From Antisthenes: It is royal to do good and to be abused.
It is a base thing for the countenance to be obedient and to
regulate and compose itself as the mind commands, and for
the mind not to be regulated and composed by itself.
25. It is not right to vex ourselves at things, For they care
nothing about it. To the immortal gods and us give joy. Life
must be reaped like the ripe ears of corn: One man is born;
another dies.
If gods care not for me and for my children, There is a reason
for it. For the good is with me, and the just. No joining others
VII—89

in their wailing, no violent emotion.
26. From Plato: But I would make this man a sufficient
answer, which is this: You speak not well, if you think that a
man who is good for anything at all ought to compute the
hazard of life or death, and should not rather look to this only
in all that he does, whether he is doing what is just or unjust,
and the works of a good or a bad man.
For thus it is, men of Athens, in truth: wherever a man has
placed himself thinking it the best place for him, or has been
placed by a commander, there in my opinion he ought to stay
and to abide the hazard, taking nothing into the reckoning,
neither death nor anything else, before the baseness of
deserting his post.
But, my good friend, reflect whether that which is noble and
good is not something different from saving and being saved;
for as to a man living such or such a time, at least one who is
really a man, consider if this is not a thing to be dismissed
from the thoughts: and there must be no love of life: but as to
these matters a man must entrust them to the deity and
believe what the women say, that no man can escape his
destiny, the next inquiry being how he may best live the time
that he has left to live.
Look round at the courses of the stars, as if you were going
along with them; and constantly consider the changes of the
elements into one another; for such thoughts purge away the
filth of the terrene life.
This is a fine saying of Plato: That he who is discoursing
VII—90

about men should look also at earthly things as if he viewed
them from some higher place; should look at them in their
assemblies, armies, agricultural labors, marriages, treaties,
births, deaths, noise of the courts of justice, desert places,
various nations of barbarians, feasts, lamentations, markets, a
mixture of all things and an orderly combination of
contraries.
27. Consider the past; such great changes of political
supremacies. You may foresee also the things which will be.
For they will certainly be of like form, and it is not possible
that they should deviate from the order of the things which
take place now: accordingly to have contemplated human life
for forty years is the same as to have contemplated it for ten
thousand years. For what more will you see?
That which has grown from the earth to the earth, But that
which has sprung from heavenly seed, Back to the heavenly
realms returns.
This is either a dissolution of the mutual involution
(entangled involvement), of the atoms, or a similar dispersion
of the insentient elements.
With food and drinks and cunning magic arts, Turning the
channel’s course to escape from death. The breeze which
heaven had sent, We must endure, and toil without
complaining.
28. Another may be more expert in casting his opponent; but
he is not more social, nor more modest, nor better disciplined
to meet all that happens, nor more considerate with respect to
VII—91

the faults of his neighbors.
29. Where any work can be done conformably to the reason
which is common to gods and men, there we have nothing to
fear: for where we are able to get profit by means of the
activity which is successful, and proceeds according to our
constitution, there no harm is to be suspected.
Everywhere and at all times it is in your power piously to
acquiesce in your present condition, and to behave justly to
those who are about you, and to exert your skill upon your
present thoughts, that nothing shall steal into them without
being well examined.
30. Do not look around you to discover other men’s ruling
principles, but look straight to this, to what nature leads you,
both the universal nature through the things which happen to
you, and your own nature through the acts which must be
done by you. But every being ought to do that which is
according to its constitution; and all other things have been
constituted for the sake of rational beings, just as among
irrational things the inferior for the sake of the superior, but
the rational for the sake of one another.
The prime principle then in man’s constitution is the social.
And the second is not to yield to the persuasions of the body,
for it is the peculiar office of the rational and intelligent
motion to circumscribe itself, and never to be overpowered
either by the motion of the senses nor of the appetites, for
both are animal; but the intelligent motion claims superiority
and does not permit itself to be overpowered by the others.
And with good reason, for it is formed by nature to use all of
VII—92

them. The third thing in the rational constitution is freedom
from error and from deception. Let then the ruling principle
holding fast to these things go straight on, and it has what is
its own.
31. Consider yourself to be dead, and to have completed your
life up to the present time; and live according to nature the
remainder which is allowed you.
Love only that which happens to you, and is spun with the
thread of your destiny. For what is more suitable?
In everything which happens keep before your eyes those to
whom the same things happened, and how they were vexed,
and treated them as strange things, and found fault with them:
and now where are they? Nowhere. Why then do you too
choose to act in the same way? And why do you not leave
these agitations which are foreign to nature, to those who
cause them and those who are moved by them? And why are
you not altogether intent upon the right way of making use of
the things which happen to you? For then you will use them
well, and they will be a material for you to work on. Only
attend to yourself, and resolve to be a good man in every act
which you do: and remember... Look within. Within is the
fountain of good, and it will ever bubble up, if you will ever
dig.
32.The body ought to be compact, and to show no irregularity
either in motion or attitude. For what the mind shows in the
face by maintaining in it the expression of intelligence and
propriety, that ought to be required also in the whole body.
But all of these things should be observed without affectation.
VII—93

33. The art of life is more like the wrestler’s art than the
dancer’s, in respect of this, that it should stand ready and firm
to meet onsets which are sudden and unexpected.
34. Constantly observe who those are whose approbation you
wish to have, and what ruling principles they possess. For
then you will neither blame those who offend involuntarily,
nor will you want their approbation, if you look to the sources
of their opinions and appetites.
Every soul, the philosopher says, is involuntarily deprived of
truth; consequently in the same way it is deprived of justice
and temperance and benevolence and everything of the kind.
It is most necessary to bear this constantly in mind, for thus
you will be more gentle towards all.
35. In every pain let this thought be present, that there is no
dishonor in it, nor does it make the governing intelligence
worse, for it does not damage the intelligence either so far as
the intelligence is rational or so far as it is social. Indeed in
the case of most pains let this remark of Epicurus aid you,
that pain is neither intolerable nor everlasting, if you bear in
mind that it has its limits, and if you add nothing to it in
imagination: and remember this too, that we do not perceive
that many things which are disagreeable to us are the same as
pain, such as excessive exhaustion, and the being scorched by
heat, and having no appetite. When then you are discontented
about any of these things, say to yourself, that you are
yielding to pain.
36. Take care not to feel towards the inhuman, as they feel
towards men.
VII—94

37. How do we know if Telauges was not superior in
character to Socrates? For it is not enough that Socrates died
a more noble death, and disputed more skillfully with the
sophists, and passed the night in the cold with more
endurance, and that when he was bid to arrest Leon of
Salamis, he considered it more noble to refuse, and that he
walked in a swaggering way in the streets, though as to this
fact one may have great doubts if it was true. But we ought to
inquire, what kind of a soul it was that Socrates possessed,
and if he was able to be content with being just towards men
and pious towards the gods, neither idly vexed on account of
men’s villainy, nor yet making himself a slave to any man’s
ignorance, nor receiving as strange anything that fell to his
share out of the universal, nor enduring it as intolerable, nor
allowing his understanding to sympathize with the affects of
the miserable flesh.
Nature has not so mingled the intelligence with the
composition of the body, as not to have allowed you the
power of circumscribing yourself and of bringing under
subjection to yourself all that is your own;
38. For it is very possible to be a divine man and to be
recognized as such by no one. Always bear this in mind; and
another thing too, that very little indeed is necessary for
living a happy life. And because you have despaired of
becoming a dialectician and skilled in the knowledge of
nature, do not for this reason renounce the hope of being both
free and modest and social and obedient to God.
39. It is in your power to live free from all compulsion in the
VII—95

greatest tranquility of mind, even if all the world cry out
against you as much as they choose, and even if wild beasts
tear in pieces the members of this kneaded matter which has
grown around you. For what hinders the mind in the midst of
all this from maintaining itself in tranquility and in a just
judgment of all surrounding things and in a ready use of the
objects which are presented to it, so that the judgment may
say to the thing which falls under its observation: This you
are in substance (reality), though in men’s opinion you may
appear to be of a different kind; and the discretion shall say to
that which falls under the hand: You are the thing that I was
seeking; for to me that which presents itself is always a
material for virtue both rational and political, (social) and in a
word, for the exercise of art, which belongs to man and God.
For everything which happens has a relationship either to
man or God, and is neither new nor difficult to handle, but a
usual and apt matter to work on.
40. The perfection of moral character consists in this, in
passing every day as the last, and in being neither violently
excited nor torpid nor playing the hypocrite.
41. The gods who are immortal are not vexed because during
so long a time they must tolerate continually men such as
they are, and so many of them bad; and besides this, they also
take care of them in all ways. But you, who are destined to
end so soon, are you wearied of enduring the bad, and this too
when you are one of them?
It is a ridiculous thing for a man not to fly from his own
badness, which is indeed possible, but to fly from other men’s
VII—96

badness, which is impossible.
42. Whatever the rational and political (social) faculty finds
to be neither intelligent nor social, it properly judges to be
inferior to itself.
43. When you have done a good act and another has received
it, why do you look for a third thing besides these, as fools
do, either to have the reputation of having done a good act or
to obtain a return?
No man is tired of receiving what is useful. But it is useful to
act according to nature. Do not then be tired of receiving what
is useful by doing it to others.
44. The nature of the Universe moved deliberately to make
the universe. But now either everything that takes place
comes by way of consequence or continuity; or even if the
chief things towards which the ruling power of the universe
directs its own movement, are governed by no rational
principle. If this is remembered it will make you more
tranquil in many things.

VIII. BOOK EIGHT
1. THIS REFLECTION also tends to the removal of the
desire for empty fame, that it is no longer in your power to
have lived the whole of your life, or at least your life from
your youth upwards, like a philosopher; but both to many
VIII—97

others and to yourself it is plain that you are far from
philosophy. You have fallen into disorder then, so that it is no
longer easy for you to get the reputation of a philosopher; and
your plan of life also opposes it. If then you have truly seen
where the matter lies, throw away the thought, how you shall
seem to others, and be content if you shall live the rest of
your life in such wisdom as your nature wills. Observe then
what it wills, and let nothing else distract you; for you had
experience of many wanderings without having found
happiness anywhere, not in syllogisms (deductive reasoning),
nor in wealth, nor in reputation, nor in enjoyment, nor
anywhere. Where is it then? In doing what man’s nature
requires. How then shall a man do this? If he has principles
from which come his affects and his acts. What principles?
Those which relate to good and bad: the belief that there is
nothing good for man, which does not make him just,
temperate, manly, free; and that there is nothing bad, which
does not do the contrary to what has been mentioned.
2. On the occasion of every act ask yourself, how is this with
respect to me? Shall I repent of it? A little time and I am
dead, and all is gone. What more do I seek, if what I am now
doing is the work of an intelligent living being, and a social
being, and one who is under the same law with God?
3. Alexander and Gaius and Pompeius, what are they in
comparison with Diogenes and Heraclitus and Socrates? For
they were acquainted with things, and their causes (forms),
and their matter, and the ruling principles of these men were
the same. But as to the others, how many things had they to
care for, and to how many things were they slaves?
VIII—98

4. Consider that men will do the same things nevertheless,
even though you should burst.
This is the chief thing: Be not perturbed, for all things are
according to the nature of the universal; and in a little time
you will be nobody and nowhere, like Hadrian and Augustus.
In the next place having fixed your eyes steadily on your
business look at it, and at the same time remembering that it
is your duty to be a good man, and what man’s nature
demands, do that without turning aside; and speak as it seems
to you most just, only let it be with a good disposition and
with modesty and without hypocrisy.
5. The nature of the universal has this work to do, to remove
to that place the things which are in this place, to change
them, to take them away hence, and to carry them there. All
things are changing, yet we need not fear anything new. All
things are familiar to us; and the distribution of them still
remains the same.
6. Every nature is contented with itself when it goes on its
way well; and a rational nature goes on its way well, when in
its thoughts it assents to nothing false or uncertain, and when
it directs its movements to social acts only, and when it
confines its desires and aversions to the things which are in
its power, and when it is satisfied with everything that is
assigned to it by the common nature. For of this common
nature every particular nature is a part, as the nature of the
leaf is a part of the nature of the plant; except that in the plant
the nature of the leaf is part of a nature which has not
perception or reason, and is subject to be impeded; but the
VIII—99

nature of man is part of a nature which is not subject to
impediments, and is intelligent and just, since it gives to
everything in equal portions and according to its worth, times,
substance, cause (form), activity, and incident. But examine,
not to discover that any one thing compared with any other
single thing is equal in all respects, but by taking all the parts
together of one thing and comparing them with all the parts
together of another.
7. You have not leisure or ability to read. But you have
leisure or ability to check arrogance: you have leisure to be
superior to pleasure and pain: you have leisure to be superior
to love of fame, and not to be vexed at stupid and ungrateful
people, nay even to care for them.
8. Let no man any longer hear you finding fault with the court
life nor with your own life.
9. Repentance is a kind of self-reproof for having neglected
something useful; but that which is good must be something
useful, and the perfect good man should look after it. But no
such man would ever repent of having refused any sensual
pleasure. Pleasure then is neither good nor useful.
10. This thing, what is it in itself, in its own constitution?
What is its substance and material? And what is its causal
nature (or form)? And what is it doing in the world? And how
long does it subsist?
11. When you rise from sleep with reluctance, remember that
it is according to your constitution and according to human
nature to perform social acts, but sleeping is common also to
VIII—100

irrational animals. But that which is according to each
individual’s nature is also more peculiarly its own, and more
suitable to its nature, and indeed also more agreeable.
12. Constantly and, if it be possible, on the occasion of every
impression on the soul, apply to it the principles of Physics,
of Ethics, and of Dialectics (logical examination of seemingly
different prospectives).
13. Whatever man you meet with, immediately say to
yourself: What opinions has this man about good and bad?
For if with respect to pleasure and pain and the causes of
each, and with respect to fame and ignominy, death and life,
he has such and such opinions, it will seem nothing
wonderful or strange to me, if he does such and such things;
and I shall bear in mind that he is compelled to do so.
Remember that as it is a shame to be surprised if the fig-tree
produces figs, so it is to be surprised if the world produces
such and such things of which it is productive; and for the
physician and the helmsman it is a shame to be surprised, if a
man has a fever, or if the wind is unfavorable.
14. Remember that to change your opinion and to follow him
who corrects your error is as consistent with freedom as it is
to persist in your error. For it is your own, the activity which
is exerted according to your own movement and judgment,
and indeed according to your own understanding too.
15. If a thing is in your own power, why don’t you do it? But
if it is in the power of another, whom do you blame? The
atoms (chance) or the gods? Both are foolish. You must
VIII—101

blame nobody. For if you can, correct that which is the cause;
but if you cannot do this, correct at least the thing itself; but if
you cannot do even this, of what use is it to you to find fault?
For nothing should be done without a purpose.
16. That which has died falls not out of the universe. If it
stays here, it also changes here, and is dissolved into its
proper parts, which are elements of the universe and of
yourself. And these too change, and they murmur not.
17. Everything exists for some end, a horse, a vine. Why do
you wonder? Even the sun will say, I am for some purpose,
and the rest of the gods will say the same. For what purpose
then are you? To enjoy pleasure? See if common sense allows
this.
18. Nature has had regard in everything no less to the end
than to the beginning and in the continuance.
19. Just like the man who throws up a ball. What good is it
then for the ball to be thrown up, or harm for it to come
down, or even to have fallen? And what good is it to the
bubble while it holds together, or what harm when it is burst?
The same may be said of a light also.
Turn it (the body) inside out, and see what kind of thing it is;
and when it has grown old, what kind of thing it becomes,
and when it is diseased.
Short-lived are both the praiser and the praised, and the
rememberer and the remembered: and all this in a nook of
this part of the world; and not even here do all agree, no, not
VIII—102

anyone even with himself: and the whole earth too is just a
point.
20. Attend to the matter which is before you, whether it is an
opinion or an act or a word.
21. You suffer this justly: for you choose rather to become
good tomorrow than to be good today.
22. Am I doing anything? I do it with reference to the good of
mankind. Does anything happen to me? I receive it and refer
it to the gods, and the source of all things, from which all that
happens is derived.
23. Such as bathing appears to you—oil, sweat, dirt, filthy
water, all things disgusting—so is every part of life and
everything.
24. Lucilla saw Verus die, and then Lucilla died. Secunda
saw Maximus die, and then Secunda died. Epitynchanus saw
Diotimus die, and Epitynchanus died. Antoninus saw
Faustina die, and then Antoninus died. Such is everything.
Celer saw Hadrian die, and then Celer died. And those sharpwitted men, either seers or men inflated with pride, where are
they? For instance the sharp-witted men, Charax and
Demetrius the Platonist and Eudaemon, and any one else like
them. All ephemeral, dead long ago. Some indeed have not
been remembered even for a short time, and others have
become the heroes of fables, and again others have
disappeared even from fables. Remember this then, that this
little compound, yourself, must either be dissolved, or your
poor breath must be extinguished, or be removed and placed
VIII—103

elsewhere.
25. It is satisfaction to a man to do the proper works of a man.
Now it is a proper work of a man to be benevolent to his own
kind, to despise the movements of the senses, to form a just
judgment of plausible appearances, and to take a survey of
the nature of the universe and the things which happen in it.
There are three relations between you and other things: the
one to the body which surrounds you; the second to the divine
cause from which all things come to all; and the third to those
who live with you.
26. Pain is either an evil to the body—then let the body say
what it thinks of it—or to the soul; but it is in the power of
the soul to maintain its own serenity and tranquility, and not
to think that pain is an evil. For every judgment and
movement and desire and aversion is within, and no evil
ascends so high.
27. Wipe out your imaginations by often saying to yourself:
now it is in my power to let no badness be in this soul, nor
desire nor any perturbation at all; but looking at all things I
see what is their nature, and I use each according to its
value.—Remember this power which you have from nature.
28. Speak both in the senate and to every man, whoever he
may be, appropriately, not with any affectation: use plain
discourse.
29. Augustus’ court, wife, daughter, descendants, ancestors,
sister, Agrippa, kinsmen, intimates, friends, Areius,
VIII—104

Maecenas, physicians and sacrificing priests—the whole
court is dead. Then turn to the rest, not considering the death
of a single man, but of a whole race, as of the Pompeii; and
that which is inscribed on the tombs—The last of his race.
Then consider what trouble those before them have had that
they might leave a successor; and then, that of necessity some
one must be the last. Again here consider the death of a whole
race.
30. It is your duty to order your life well in every single act;
and if every act does its duty, as far as is possible, be content;
and no one is able to hinder you so that each act shall not do
its duty.—But something external will stand in the way.—
Nothing will stand in the way of your acting justly and
soberly and considerately.—But perhaps some other active
power will be hindered.—Well, but by acquiescing in the
hindrance and by being content to transfer your efforts to that
which is allowed, another opportunity of action is
immediately put before you in place of that which was
hindered, and one which will adapt itself to this ordering of
which we are speaking.
31. Receive wealth or prosperity without arrogance; and be
ready to let it go.
32. If you ever saw a hand cut off, or a foot, or a head, lying
anywhere apart from the rest of the body, such does a man
make himself, as far as he can, who is not content with what
happens, and separates himself from others, or does anything
unsocial. Suppose that you have detached yourself from the
natural unity—for you were made by nature a part, but now
VIII—105

you have cut yourself off—yet here there is this beautiful
provision, that it is in your power again to unite yourself. God
has allowed this to no other part, after it has been separated
and cut asunder, to come together again. But consider the
kindness by which he has distinguished man, for he has put it
in his power not to be separated at all from the universal; and
when he has been separated, he has allowed him to return and
to be united and to resume his place as a part.
33. As the nature of the universal has given to every rational
being all the other powers that it has, so we have received
from it this power also. For as the universal nature converts
and fixes in its predestined place everything which stands in
the way and opposes it, and makes such things a part of itself,
so also the rational animal is able to make every hindrance its
own material, and to use it for such purposes as it may have
designed.
34. Do not disturb yourself by thinking of the whole of your
life. Let not your thoughts at once embrace all the various
troubles which you may expect to befall you: but on every
occasion ask yourself, What is there in this which is
intolerable and beyond bearing? For you will be ashamed to
confess. In the next place remember that neither the future
nor the past pains you, but only the present. But this is
reduced to a very little, if you only circumscribe it, and chid
(scold and correct) your mind, if it is unable to hold out
against even this.
35. Does Panthea or Pergamus now sit by the tomb of Verus?
Does Chaurias or Diotimus sit by the tomb of Hadrian? That
VIII—106

would be ridiculous. Well, suppose they did sit there, would
the dead be conscious of it? And if the dead were conscious,
would they be pleased? And if they were pleased, would that
make them immortal? Was it not in the order of destiny that
these persons too should first become old women and old
men and then die? What then would those do after these were
dead? All this is foul smell and blood in a bag.
36. If you can see sharp, look and judge wisely, says the
philosopher.
37. In the constitution of the rational animal I see no virtue
which is opposed to justice; but I see a virtue which is
opposed to love of pleasure, and that is temperance.
38. If you take away your opinion about that which appears to
give you pain, you yourself stand in perfect security.—Who
is this self?—The reason.—But I am not reason.—Be it so.
Let then the reason itself not trouble itself. But if any other
part of you suffers, let it have its own opinion about itself.
39. Hindrance to the perceptions of sense is an evil to the
animal nature. Hindrance to the movements (desires) is
equally an evil to the animal nature. And something else also
is equally an impediment and an evil to the constitution of
plants. So then that which is a hindrance to the intelligence is
an evil to the intelligent nature. Apply all these things then to
yourself. Does pain or sensuous pleasure affect you? The
senses will look to that.—Has any obstacle opposed you in
your efforts towards an object? if indeed you were making
this effort absolutely (unconditionally, or without any
reservation), certainly this obstacle is an evil to you
VIII—107

considered as a rational animal. But if you take into
consideration the usual course of things, you have not yet
been injured nor even impeded. The things however which
are proper to the understanding, no other man is used to
impede, for neither fire, nor iron, nor tyrant, nor abuse,
touches it in any way.
40. When it has been made a sphere, it continues as a sphere.
(See XI – 11.)
41. It is not fit that I should give myself pain, for I have never
intentionally given pain even to another.
Different things delight different people. But it is my delight
to keep the ruling faculty sound without turning away either
from any man or from any of the things which happen to
men, but looking at and receiving all with welcome eyes and
using everything according to its value.
42. See that you secure this present time to yourself: for those
who rather pursue posthumous fame do consider that the men
of after time will be exactly such as these whom they cannot
bear now; and both are mortal. And what is it in any way to
you if these men of after time utter this or that sound, or have
this or that opinion about you?
43. Take me and cast me where you will; for there I shall
keep my divine part tranquil, that is, content, if it can feel and
act conformably to its proper constitution.
44. Is this change of place sufficient reason why my soul
should be unhappy and worse than it was, depressed,
VIII—108

expanded, shrinking, affrighted? And what will you find
which is sufficient reason for this?
45. Nothing can happen to any man which is not a human
accident, nor to an ox which is not according to the nature of
an ox, nor to a vine which is not according to the nature of a
vine, nor to a stone which is not proper to a stone. If then
there happens to each thing both what is usual and natural,
why should you complain? For the common nature brings
nothing which may not be endured by you.
If you are pained by any external thing, it is not this thing that
disturbs you, but your own judgment about it. And it is in
your power to wipe out this judgment now. But if anything in
your own disposition gives you pain, who hinders you from
correcting your opinion? And even if you are pained because
you are not doing some particular thing which seems to you
to be right, why do you not rather act than complain?—But
some insuperable obstacle is in the way?—Do not be grieved
then, for the cause of its not being done depends not on
you.—But it is not worth while to live if this cannot be
done.— Take your departure then from life contentedly, just
as he dies who is in full activity, and well pleased too with
the things which are obstacles.
46. Remember that the ruling faculty is invincible, when selfcollected it is satisfied with itself, if it does nothing which it
does not choose to do, even if it resists from mere obstinacy.
What then will it be when it forms a judgment about anything
aided by reason and deliberately? Therefore the mind which
is free from passions is a citadel, for man has nothing more
VIII—109

secure to which he can fly for refuge, and for the future to be
inexpugnable (not overcome by force). He then who has not
seen this is an ignorant man; but he who has seen it and does
not fly to this refuge is unhappy.
47. Say nothing more to yourself than what the first
appearances report. Suppose that it has been reported to you
that a certain person speaks ill of you. This has been reported;
but that you have been injured, that has not been reported. I
see that my child is sick. I do see; but that he is in danger, I
do not see. Thus then always abide by the first appearances,
and add nothing yourself from within, and then nothing
happens to you. Or rather add something, like a man who
knows everything that happens in the world.
48. A cucumber is bitter.—Throw it away.—There are briars
in the road.—Turn aside from them.—This is enough. Do not
add, ‘And why were such things made in the world?’ For you
will be ridiculed by a man who is acquainted with nature, as
you would be ridiculed by a carpenter and shoemaker if you
did find fault because you see in their workshop shavings and
cuttings from the things which they make. And yet they have
places into which they can throw these shavings and cuttings,
and the universal nature has no external space; but the
wondrous part of her art is that though she has circumscribed
herself, everything within her which appears to decay and to
grow old and to be useless she changes into herself, and again
makes other new things from these very same, so that she
requires neither substance from without nor wants a place
into which she may cast that which decays. She is content
then with her own space, and her own matter and her own art.
VIII—110

49. Neither in your actions be sluggish nor in your
conversation without method, nor wandering in your
thoughts, nor let there be in your soul inward contention nor
external effusion, (pouring forth) nor in life be so busy as to
have no leisure.
50. Suppose that men kill you, cut you in pieces, curse you.
What then can these things do to prevent your mind from
remaining pure, wise, sober, just? For instance, if a man
should stand by a limpid pure spring, and curse it, the spring
never ceases sending up potable water; and if he should cast
clay into it or filth, it will speedily disperse them and wash
them out, and will not be at all polluted. How then shall you
possess a perpetual fountain and not a mere well? By forming
yourself hourly to freedom conjoined with contentment,
simplicity and modesty.
51. He who does not know what the world is, does not know
where he is. And he who does not know for what purpose the
world exists, does not know who he is, nor what the world is.
But he who has failed in any one of these things could not
even say for what purpose he exists himself. What then do
you think of him who avoids or seeks the praise of those who
applaud, of men who know not either where they are or who
they are?
Do you wish to be praised by a man who curses himself
thrice every hour? Would you wish to please a man who does
not please himself? Does a man please himself who repents of
nearly everything that he does?
52. No longer let your breathing only act in concert with the
VIII—111

air which surrounds you, but let your intelligence also now be
in harmony with the intelligence which embraces all things.
For the intelligent power is no less diffused in all parts and
pervades all things for him who is willing to draw it to him
just as the aerial power for him who is able to respire it.
53. Generally, wickedness does no harm at all to the universe;
and particularly, the wickedness of one man does no harm to
another. It is only harmful to him who, having it within his
power to be released from it, yet has not chosen to do so.
To my own free will the free will of my neighbor is just as
indifferent as his poor breath and flesh. For though we are
made especially for the sake of one another, still the ruling
power of each of us has its own office, for otherwise my
neighbor’s wickedness would be my harm, which God has
not willed in order that my unhappiness may not depend on
another.
54. The sun appears to be poured down, and in all directions
indeed it is diffused, yet it is not effused. For this diffusion is
extension: Accordingly its rays are called Extensions
[aktines] because they are extended [apo tou ekteinesthai].
But one may judge what kind of a thing a ray is, if he looks at
the sun’s light passing through a narrow opening into a
darkened room, for it is extended in a right line, and as it
were is divided when it meets with any solid body which
stands in the way and intercepts the air beyond; but there the
light remains fixed and does not glide or fall off.
Such then ought to be the out-pouring and diffusion of the
understanding, and it should in no way be an effusion, but an
VIII—112

extension, and it should make no violent or impetuous
collision with the obstacles which are in its way; nor yet fall
down, but be fixed and enlighten that which receives it. For a
body will deprive itself of the illumination, if it does not
admit it.
55. He who fears death either fears the loss of sensation or a
different kind of sensation. But if you shall have no sensation,
neither will you feel any harm; and if you shall acquire
another kind of sensation, you will be a different kind of
living being and you will not cease to live.
56. Men exist for the sake of one another. Teach them then or
bear with them.
57. In one way an arrow moves, in another way the mind. The
mind indeed, both when it is wary and exercises caution and
when it is employed about inquiry turns many ways, or can
move straight onward without circumspection to its object.
58. Enter into every man’s ruling faculty; and also let every
other man enter into yours.

IX. BOOK NINE
1. HE WHO ACTS UNJUSTLY acts impiously. For since the
universal nature has made rational animals for the sake of one
another to help one another according to their deserts, but in
no way to injure one another, he who transgresses her will, is
IX—113

clearly guilty of impiety towards the highest divinity. And he
too who lies is guilty of impiety to the same divinity; for the
universal nature is the nature of things that are; and things
that are have a relation to all things that come into existence.
And further, this universal nature is named truth, and is the
prime cause of all things that are true. He then who lies
intentionally is guilty of impiety in as much as he acts
unjustly by deceiving; and he also who lies unintentionally,
inasmuch as he is at variance with the universal nature, and
inasmuch as he disturbs the order by fighting against the
nature of the world; for he fights against it, who is moved of
himself to that which is contrary to truth, for he had received
powers from nature through the neglect of which he is not
able now to distinguish falsehood from truth.
And indeed he who pursues pleasure as good, and avoids pain
as evil, is guilty of impiety. For of necessity such a man must
often find fault with the universal nature, alleging that it
assigns things to the bad and the good contrary to their
deserts, because frequently the bad are in the enjoyment of
pleasure and possess the things which procure pleasure, but
the good have pain for their share and the things which cause
pain. And further, he who is afraid of pain will sometimes
also be afraid of some of the things which will happen in the
world, and even this is impiety. And he who pursues pleasure
will not abstain from injustice, and this is plainly impiety.
Now with respect to the things towards which the universal
nature is equally affected—for it would not have made both
unless it was equally affected towards both—towards these,
they who wish to follow nature should be of the same mind
IX—114

with it, and equally affected. With respect to pain then, and
pleasure, or death and life, or honor and dishonor, which the
universal nature employs equally, whoever is not equally
affected is manifestly acting impiously. And I say that the
universal nature employs them equally, instead of saying that
they happen alike to those who are produced in continuous
series, and to those who come after them by virtue of a
certain original movement of Providence, according to which
it moved from a certain beginning to this ordering of things,
having conceived certain principles of the things which were
to be, and having determined powers productive of beings
and of changes and of such like successions.
2. It would be a man’s happiest lot to depart from mankind
without having had any taste of lying and hypocrisy and
luxury and pride. However to breathe out one’s life when a
man has had enough of these things is the next best voyage,
as the saying is. Have you determined to abide with vice, and
has not experience yet induced you to fly from this
pestilence? For the destruction of the understanding is a
pestilence, much more indeed than any such corruption and
change of this atmosphere which surrounds us. For this
corruption is a pestilence of animals so far as they are
animals; but the other is a pestilence of men so far as they are
men.
3. Do not despise death, but be well content with it, since this
too is one of those things which nature wills. For such as it is
to be young and to grow old, and to increase and to reach
maturity, and to have teeth and beard and grey hairs, and to
beget, and to be pregnant and to bring forth, and all the other
IX—115

natural operations which the seasons of your life bring, such
also is dissolution.
This then is consistent with the character of a reflecting man,
to be neither careless nor impatient nor contemptuous with
respect to death, but to wait for it as one of the operations of
nature. As you now wait for the time when the child shall
come out of your wife’s womb, so be ready for the time when
your soul shall fall out of this envelope.
But if you require also a vulgar kind of comfort which shall
reach your heart, you will be made best reconciled to death by
observing the objects from which you are going to be
removed, and the morals of those with whom your soul will
no longer be mingled. For it is no way right to be offended
with men, but it is your duty to care for them and to bear with
them gently; and yet to remember that your departure will be
not from men who have the same principles as yourself. For
this is the only thing, if there be any, which could draw us the
contrary way and attach us to life, to be permitted to live with
those who have the same principles as ourselves. But now
you see how great is the trouble arising from the discordance
of those who live together, so that you may say, Come quick
O death, lest perchance I too should forget myself.
4. He who does wrong does wrong against himself. He who
acts unjustly acts unjustly to himself, because he makes
himself bad.
He often acts unjustly who does not do a certain thing; not
only he who does a certain thing.

IX—116

5. Your present opinion founded on understanding, and your
present conduct directed to social good, and your present
disposition of contentment with everything that happens—
that is enough.
6. Wipe out imagination: check desire: extinguish appetite:
keep the ruling faculty in its own power.
7. Among the animals which have not reason, one life is
distributed; but among reasonable animals one intelligent soul
is distributed: just as there is one earth of all things which are
of an earthly nature, and we see by one light, and breathe one
air, all of us that have the faculty of vision and all that have
life.
All things which participate in anything which is common to
them all, move towards that which is of the same kind with
themselves. Everything which is earthly turns towards the
earth, everything which is liquid flows together, and
everything which is of an aerial kind does the same, so that
they require something to keep them asunder (break apart),
and the application of force.
Fire indeed moves upwards on account of the elemental fire,
but it is so ready to be kindled together with all the fire which
is here, that even every substance which is somewhat dry, is
easily ignited, because there is less mingled with it of that
which is a hindrance to ignition. Accordingly then, everything
which participates in the common intelligent nature also
moves in like manner towards that which is of the same kind
with itself, or moves even more. For so much as it is superior
in comparison with all other things, in the same degree also is
IX—117

it more ready to mingle with and to be fused with that which
is akin to it.
Accordingly among animals devoid of reason we find swarms
of bees, and herds of cattle, and the nurture of young birds,
and in a manner, loves; for even in animals there are souls,
and that power which brings them together is seen to exert
itself in the superior degree, and in such a way as never has
been observed in plants nor in stones nor in trees. But in
rational animals there are political communities and
friendships, and families and meetings of people; and in wars,
treaties and armistices. But in the things which are still
superior, even though they are separated from one another,
unity in a manner exists, as in the stars. Thus the ascent to the
higher degree is able to produce a sympathy, even in things
which are separated. See then what now takes place. For only
intelligent animals have now forgotten this mutual desire and
inclination, and in them alone the property of flowing
together is not seen. But even though men strive to avoid this
union, they are caught and held by it, for their nature is too
strong for them; and you will see what I say if you only
observe. Sooner then, will one find anything earthly which
comes in contact with no earthy thing, than a man altogether
separated from other men.
8. Both man and God and the universe produce fruit; at the
proper seasons each produces it. But if usage has especially
fixed these terms to the vine and like things, this is nothing.
Reason produces fruit both for all and for itself, and there are
produced from it other things of the same kind as reason
itself.
IX—118

9. If you are able, correct by teaching those who do wrong;
but if you cannot, remember that indulgence is given to you
for this purpose. And the gods too, are indulgent to such
persons; and for some purposes they even help them to get
health, wealth, reputation; so kind are they. And it is in your
power also; or say, who hinders you?
10. Labor not as one who is wretched, nor yet as one who
would be pitied or admired: but direct your will to one thing
only, to put yourself in motion and to check yourself, as the
social reason requires.
11. Today I have got out of all trouble, or rather I have cast
out all trouble, for it was not outside, but within and in my
opinions.
12. All things are the same, familiar in experience, and
ephemeral (short) in time, and worthless in the matter.
Everything now is just as it was in the time of those whom we
have buried.
13. Things stand outside of us, themselves by themselves,
neither knowing aught of themselves, nor expressing any
judgment. What is it then which does judge about them? The
ruling faculty.
14. Not in passivity, but in activity lays the evil and the good
of the rational social animal, just as his virtue and his vice lay
not in passivity, but in activity.
15. For the stone which has been thrown up, it is no evil to
come down, nor indeed any good to have been carried up.
IX—119

16. Penetrate inwards into men’s leading principles, and you
will see what judges you are afraid of, and what kind of
judges they are of themselves.
17. All things are changing: and you yourself are in
continuous mutation and in a manner in continuous
destruction, and the whole universe too.
18. It is your duty to leave another man’s wrongful act there,
where it was committed.
19. Termination of activity, cessation from movement and
opinion, and in a sense their death, is no evil. Turn your
thoughts now to the consideration of your life, your life as a
child, as a youth, your manhood, your old age, for in these
also every change was a death. Is this anything to fear? Turn
your thoughts now to your life under your grandfather, then
to your life under your mother, then to your life under your
father; and as you find many other differences and changes
and terminations, ask yourself, is this anything to fear? In like
manner then, neither are the termination and cessation and
change of your whole life, things to be afraid of.
20. Hasten to examine your own ruling faculty and that of the
universe and that of your neighbor: your own that you may
make it just: and that of the universe that you may remember
of what you are a part; and that of your neighbor, that you
may know whether he has acted ignorantly or with
knowledge, and that you may also consider that his ruling
faculty is akin to yours.
21. As you yourself are a component part of a social system,
IX—120

so let every act of yours be a component part of social life.
Whatever act of yours that has no reference either
immediately nor remotely to a social end, this tears asunder
your life, and does not allow it to be one, and it is of the
nature of a mutiny, just as when in a popular assembly a man
acting by himself stands apart from the general agreement.
22. Like quarrels of little children and their sports, the poor
spirits carrying about dead bodies so they may not have to fall
so soon; and what is exhibited in the representation of the
mansions of the dead, strikes our eyes more clearly.
23. Examine into the quality of the form of an object, and
detach it altogether from its material part, and then
contemplate it; then determine the time, the longest which a
thing of this peculiar form is naturally made to endure.
24. You have endured infinite troubles through not being
contented with your ruling faculty, when it does the things
which it is constituted by nature to do. But enough of this.
25. When another blames you or hates you, or when men say
about you anything injurious, approach their poor souls,
penetrate within, and see what kind of men they are. You will
discover that there is no reason to take any trouble that these
men may have this or that opinion about you. However you
must be well disposed towards them, for by nature they are
friends. And the gods too aid them in all ways, by dreams, by
signs, towards the attainment of those things on which they
set a value.
26. The periodic movements of the universe are the same, up
IX—121

and down from age to age. And either the universal
intelligence puts itself in motion for every separate effect, and
if this is so, be you content with that which is the result of its
activity; or it puts itself in motion once, and everything else
comes by way of sequence in a manner; or indivisible
elements are the origin of all things.—In a word, if there is a
god, all is well; and if chance rules, do not you also be
governed by it.
27. Soon will the earth cover us all: then the earth too, will
change, and the things also which result from change will
continue to change forever, and these again forever. For if a
man reflects on the changes and transformations which follow
one another like wave after wave and their rapidity, he will
despise everything which is perishable.
28. The universal cause is like a winter torrent: it carries
everything along with it. But how worthless are all these poor
people who are engaged in matters political, and as they
suppose, are playing the philosopher! All drivellers. Well
then man: do what nature now requires. Set yourself in
motion, if it is in your power, and do not look about you to
see if any one will observe it; nor yet expect Plato’s Republic:
but be content if the smallest thing goes on well, and consider
such an event to be no small matter. For who can change
men’s opinions? And without a change of opinions what else
is there than the slavery of men who groan while they pretend
to obey?
Come now and tell me of Alexander and Philip and
Demetrius of Phalerum. They themselves shall judge whether
IX—122

they discovered what the common nature required, and
trained themselves accordingly. But if they acted like tragedy
heroes, no one has condemned me to imitate them. Simple
and modest is the work of philosophy. Draw me not aside to
indolence (idleness) and pride.
29. Look down from above on the countless herds of men and
their countless solemnities (actions dictated by tradition), and
the infinitely varied voyages in storms and calms, and the
differences among those who are born, who live together, and
then die. And consider too, the life lived by others in olden
times, and the lives of those who will live after you, and the
life now lived among barbarous nations, and how many know
not even your name, and how many will soon forget it, and
how they who perhaps now are praising you will very soon
blame you, and that neither a posthumous name is of any
value, nor reputation, nor anything else.
Let there be freedom from perturbations with respect to the
things which come from the external cause; and let there be
justice in the things done by virtue of the internal cause, that
is, let there be movement and action terminating in this, in
social acts, for this is according to your nature.
30. You can remove out of the way many useless things
among those which disturb you, for they lie entirely in your
opinion;
31. You will then gain for yourself ample space by
comprehending the whole universe in your mind, and by
contemplating the eternity of time, and observing the rapid
change of every several thing, how short is the time from
IX—123

birth to dissolution, and the illimitable time before birth as
well as the equally boundless time after dissolution.
All that you see will quickly perish, and those who have been
spectators of its dissolution will very soon perish too. And he
who dies at an extreme old age will be brought into the same
condition with him who died prematurely.
32. What are these men’s leading principles, and about what
kind of things are they busy, and for what kind of reasons do
they love and honor? Imagine that you can see their poor
souls laid bare. When they think that they do harm by their
blame or good by their praise, what an idea!
33. Loss is nothing else than change. But the universal nature
delights in change, and in obedience to her all things are now
done well, and from eternity have been done in like form, and
will be such to time without end. What then do you say? That
all things have been and all things always will be bad, and
that no power has ever been found in so many gods to rectify
these things, but the world has been condemned to be found
in never ceasing evil?
34. The rottenness of the matter which is the foundation of
everything! Water, dust, bones, filth: or again, marble rocks,
the callosities of the earth; and gold and silver, the sediments;
and garments, only bits of hair; and purple dye, blood; and
everything else is of the same kind. And that which is of the
nature of breath is also another thing of the same kind,
changing from this to that.
35. Enough of this wretched life and murmuring and apish
IX—124

tricks. Why are you disturbed? What is there new in this?
What unsettles you? Is it the form of the thing? Look at it. Or
is it the matter? Look at it. But besides these there is nothing.
Towards the gods then, now become at last more simple.
36. It is the same whether we examine these things for a
hundred years or for only three.
37. If any man has done wrong, the harm is his own. But
perhaps he has not done wrong.
38. Either all things proceed from one intelligent source and
come together as in one body, and the part ought not to find
fault with what is done for the benefit of the whole; or there
are only atoms, and nothing else than mixture and dispersion.
Why, then, are you disturbed?
39. Say to the ruling faculty, Are you dead, are you corrupted,
are you playing the hypocrite, have you become a beast, do
you herd and feed with the rest?
40. Either the gods have no power or they have power. If then
they have no power, why do you pray to them? But if they
have power, why do you not pray for them to give you the
faculty of not fearing any of the things which you fear, or of
not desiring any of the things which you desire, or of not
being pained at anything, rather than pray that any of these
things should not happen or should happen? For certainly if
they can cooperate with men, they can cooperate for these
purposes too.
But perhaps you will say, the gods have placed them in your
IX—125

power. Well, then, is it not better to use what is in your power
like a free man, than to desire in a slavish and abject way
what is not in your power? And who has told you that the
gods do not aid us even in the things which are in our power?
Begin then, to pray for such things, and you will see. One
man prays thus: How shall I be able to lie with that woman?
Do you pray thus: How shall I not desire to lie with her?
Another prays thus: How shall I be released from this?
Another prays: How shall I not desire to be released? Another
thus: How shall I not lose my little son? You thus: How shall
I not be afraid to lose him? Then, turn your prayers this way,
and see what comes.
41. Epicurus says, In my sickness my conversation was not
about my bodily sufferings, nor says he, did I talk on such
subjects to those who visited me; but I continued to discourse
on the nature of things as before, keeping to this main point,
how the mind, while participating in such movements as go
on in the poor flesh, shall be free from perturbations and
maintain its proper good. Nor did I, he says, give the
physicians an opportunity of putting on solemn looks, as if
they were doing something great, but my life went on well
and happily. Do then the same that he did both in sickness, if
you are sick, and in any other circumstances; for never desert
philosophy in any events that may befall us, nor hold trifling
talk either with an ignorant man or with one unacquainted
with nature.
42. It is a principle of all schools of philosophy; but to be
intent only on that which you are now doing and on the
instrument by which you do it.
IX—126

43. When you are offended with any man’s shameless
conduct, immediately ask yourself, is it possible then, that
shameless men should not be in the world? It is not possible.
Do not then require what is impossible. For this man also is
one of those shameless men who must of necessity be in the
world. Let the same considerations be present to your mind in
the case of the knave, and the faithless man, and of every man
who does wrong in any way. For at the same time that you
remind yourself that it is impossible that such kinds of men
should not exist, you will become more kindly disposed
towards everyone individually. It is useful to perceive this
too, immediately when the occasion arises, what virtue nature
has given to man to oppose every wrongful act. For she has
given to man, as an antidote against the stupid man, mildness,
and against another kind of man some other power. And in all
cases it is possible for you to correct by teaching the man who
is gone astray; for every man who errs misses his object and
is gone astray. Besides wherein have you been injured? For
you will find that no one among those against whom you are
irritated has done anything by which your mind could be
made worse; but that which is evil to you and harmful has its
foundation only in the mind. And what harm is done or what
is there strange, if the man who has not been instructed does
the acts of an uninstructed man?
Consider whether you should not rather blame yourself,
because you did not expect such a man to err in such a way.
For you had means given you by your reason to suppose that
it was likely that he would commit this error. Yet you have
forgotten and are amazed that he has erred. But most of all
when you blame a man as faithless or ungrateful, turn to
IX—127

yourself. For the fault is manifestly your own, whether you
did trust that a man who had such a disposition, would keep
his promise, or when conferring your kindness you did not
confer it absolutely, nor yet in such way as to have received
from your very act all the profit in return.
For what more do you want when you have done a man a
service? Are you not content that you have done something
conformable to your nature, and do you seek to be paid for it?
Just as if the eye demanded a recompense for seeing, or the
feet for walking. For as these members are formed for a
particular purpose, and by working according to their several
constitutions obtain what is their own; so also as man is
formed by nature to acts of benevolence, when he has done
anything benevolent or in any other way conducive to the
common interest, he has acted conformably to his
constitution, and he gets what is his own.

X. BOOK TEN
1. WILL YOU then, my soul, ever be good and simple and
single and naked, more open and manifest than the body
which surrounds you? Will you ever enjoy an affectionate
and contented disposition? Will you never be full and without
a want of any kind, longing for nothing more, nor desiring
anything, either animate or inanimate, for the enjoyment of
pleasures? Nor yet desiring time wherein you shall have
longer enjoyment, or place, or pleasant climate, or society of
X—128

men with whom you may live in harmony? But will you be
satisfied with your present condition, and pleased with all that
is about you, and will you convince yourself that you have
everything and that it comes from the gods, that everything is
well for you, and will be well whatever shall please them, and
whatever they shall give for the conservation of the perfect
living being, the good and just and beautiful, which generates
and holds together all things, and contains and embraces all
things which are dissolved (die) for the production of other
like things? Will you never be such that you shall so dwell in
community with gods and men as neither to find fault with
them at all, nor to be condemned by them?
2. Observe what your nature requires, so far as you are
governed by nature only: then do it and accept it, if your
nature, so far as you are a living being, shall not be made
worse by it.
And next you must observe what your nature requires so far
as you are a living being. And all this you may allow
yourself, if your nature, so far as you are a rational animal,
shall not be made worse by it. But the rational animal is
consequently also a political (social) animal. Use these rules,
then, and trouble yourself about nothing else.
3. Everything which happens either happens in such a way as
you are formed by nature to bear it, or as you are not formed
by nature to bear it. If then, it happens to you in such way as
you are formed by nature to bear it, do not complain, but bear
it as you are formed by nature to bear it. But if it happens in
such a way as you are not formed by nature to bear it, do not
X—129

complain, for it will perish after it has consumed you.
Remember however, that you are formed by nature to bear
everything, with respect to which it depends on your own
opinion to make it endurable and tolerable, by thinking that it
is either in your interest or your duty to do this.
4. If a man is mistaken, instruct him kindly and show him his
error. But if you are not able, blame yourself, or blame not
even yourself.
5. Whatever may happen to you, it was prepared for you from
all eternity; and the implication of causes was from eternity
spinning the thread of your being, and of that which is
incident to it.
6. Whether the universe is a concourse of atoms, or nature is a
system, let this first be established, that I am a part of the
whole which is governed by nature; next, I am in a manner
intimately related to the parts which are of the same kind with
myself. For remembering this, inasmuch as I am a part, I shall
be discontented with none of the things which are assigned to
me out of the whole; for nothing is injurious to the part if it is
for the advantage of the whole. For the whole contains
nothing which is not for its advantage; and all natures indeed
have this common principle, but the nature of the universe
has this principle besides, that it cannot be compelled even by
any external cause to generate anything harmful to itself. By
remembering then, that I am a part of such a whole, I shall be
content with everything that happens. And inasmuch as I am
in a manner intimately related to the parts which are of the
same kind with myself, I shall do nothing unsocial, but I shall
X—130

rather direct myself to the things which are of the same kind
with myself, and I shall turn my efforts to the common
interest, and divert them from the contrary. Now if these
things are done so, life must flow on happily, just as you may
observe that the life of a citizen is happy, who continues a
course of action which is advantageous to his fellow-citizens,
and is content with whatever the state may assign to him.
7. The parts of the whole, everything I mean which is
naturally comprehended in the universe, must of necessity
perish; but let this be understood in this sense, that they must
undergo change. But if this is naturally both an evil and a
necessity for the parts, the whole would not continue to exist
in a good condition, the parts being subject to change and
constituted so as to perish in various ways. For where did
nature herself design to do evil to the things which are parts
of herself, and to make them subject to evil and of necessity
fall into evil, or have such results happened without her
knowing it? Both these suppositions, indeed, are untenable.
But if a man should even drop the term Nature (as an efficient
power), and should speak of these things as natural, even then
it would be ridiculous to affirm at the same time that the parts
of the whole are in their nature subject to change, and at the
same time to be surprised or vexed as if something were
happening contrary to nature, particularly as to the dissolution
of things is into those things of which each thing is
composed.
For there is either a dispersion of the elements out of which
everything has been compounded, or a change from the solid
to the earthly and from the airy to the aerial, so that these
X—131

parts are taken back into the universal reason, whether this at
certain periods is consumed by fire, or renewed by eternal
changes. And do not imagine that the solid and the airy part
belong to you from the time of generation. For all this
received its accretion (gradual growth) only yesterday and the
day before, as one may say, from the food and the air which
is inspired. This then, which has received the accretion
changes, not that which your mother brought forth. But
suppose that this which your mother brought forth implicates
you very much with that other part, which has the peculiar
quality of change, this is nothing, in fact, in the way of
objection to what is said.
8. When you have assumed these names, good, modest, true,
rational, a man of equanimity, and magnanimous, take care
that you do not change these names; and if you should lose
them, quickly return to them. And remember that:
•

The term Rational was intended to signify a
discriminating attention to every several thing and
freedom from negligence; and that

•

Equanimity is the voluntary acceptance of the things
which are assigned to you by the common nature; and
that

•

Magnanimity is the elevation of the intelligent part
above the pleasurable or painful sensations of the
flesh, and above that poor thing called fame, and
death, and all such things.

If, then you maintain yourself in the possession of these
X—132

names, without desiring to be called by these names by
others,
‘you will be another person and will enter into another life.’
For to continue to be such as you have hitherto been, and to
be torn in pieces and defiled in such a life, is the character of
a very stupid man and one over-fond of his life, and like those
half-devoured fighters with wild beasts, who though covered
with wounds and gore, still entreat to be kept to the following
day, though they will be exposed in the same state to the
same claws and bites. Therefore fix yourself in the possession
of these few names: and if you are able to abide in them,
abide as if you were removed to certain islands of the Happy.
But if you shall perceive that you fall out of them and do not
maintain your hold, go courageously into some nook where
you shall maintain them, or even depart at once from life, not
in passion, but with simplicity and freedom and modesty,
after doing this one laudable thing at least in your life, to have
gone out of it thus.
In order however for the remembrance of these names, it will
greatly help you if you remember the gods, and that they wish
not to be flattered, but wish all reasonable beings to be made
like themselves; and if you remember that what does the work
of a fig-tree is a fig-tree, and that what does the work of a dog
is a dog, and that what does the work of a bee is a bee, and
that which does the work of a man is a man.
9. Toys of foolishness, wars, astonished terror, torpor and
sloth, slavery, will daily wipe out those holy principles of
yours. How many things without studying nature do you
X—133

imagine, and how many do you neglect? But it is your duty so
to look on and so to do everything, so that at the same time
the power of dealing with circumstances is perfected, and the
contemplative faculty is exercised, and the confidence which
comes from the knowledge of each several thing is
maintained, without showing it but yet not concealed. For
when will you enjoy simplicity, when gravity, and when the
knowledge of every several thing, both what it is in
substance, and what place it has in the universe, and how long
it is formed to exist, and of what things it is compounded, and
to whom it can belong, and who are able both to give it and to
take it away?
10. A spider is proud when it has caught a fly, and another
when he has caught a poor hare, and another when he has
taken a little fish in a net, and another when he has taken wild
boars, and another when he has taken bears, and another
th
th
when he has taken Sarmatians (people of Iran 5 to 4
century BC). Are not these all robbers, if you examine their
opinions?
11. Acquire the contemplative way of seeing how all things
change into one another, and you can constantly attend to it,
and exercise yourself about this part of philosophy. For
nothing is so much adapted to produce magnanimity.
12. Such a man has put off the body, and as he sees that he
must, (no one knows how soon), go away from among men
and leave everything here, he gives himself up entirely to just
doing in all his actions, and in everything else that happens,
he resigns himself to the universal nature. But as to what any
X—134

man shall say or think about him or do against him, he never
even thinks of it, being himself contented with these two
things, with acting justly in what he now does, and being
satisfied with what is now assigned to him; and he lays aside
all distracting and busy pursuits, and desires nothing else than
to accomplish the straight course through the law, and by
accomplishing the straight course to follow God.
13. What need is there of suspicious fear, since it is in your
power to inquire what ought to be done? And if you see
clearly, go by this way content and without turning back: but
if you do not see clearly, stop and take the best advisers. But
if any other things oppose you, go on according to your
powers with due consideration, keeping to that which appears
to be just. For it is best to reach this object, and if you do fail,
let your failure be in attempting this. He who follows reason
in all things is both tranquil and active at the same time, and
also cheerful and collected.
14. Inquire of yourself as soon as you wake from sleep,
whether it will make any difference to you if another does
what is just and right. It will make no difference.
15. You have not forgotten I suppose, that those who assume
arrogant airs in bestowing their praise or blame on others, are
such as they are at bed and at board, and you have not
forgotten what they do, and what they avoid and what they
pursue, and how they steal and how they rob, not always with
hands and feet, but with their most valuable part, that by
which there is produced, if a man chooses, fidelity, modesty,
truth, law, a good daemon (happiness)?
X—135

16. To her who gives and takes back all, to nature, the man
who is instructed and modest says, Give what you will; take
back what you will. And he says this not proudly, but
obediently and well pleased with her.
17. Short is the little time which remains to you of life. Live
as on a mountain. For it makes no difference whether a man
lives here nor there, if he lives everywhere in the world as in
a state (political community). Let men see, let them know a
real man who lives according to nature. If they cannot endure
him, let them kill him. For that is better than to live thus as
men do.
18. No longer talk at all about the kind of man that a good
man ought to be, but be such a man.
19. Constantly contemplate the whole of time and the whole
of substance, and consider that all individual things as to
substance are a grain of a fig, and as to time, the turning of a
gimlet (tool to drill holes).
Look at everything that exists, and observe that it is already in
dissolution and change, and as in putrefaction or dispersion,
or that everything is so constituted by nature as to die.
20. Consider what men are when they are eating, sleeping,
generating, easing themselves and so forth. Then what kind of
men they are when they are imperious and arrogant, or angry
and scolding from their elevated place. But a short time ago
to how many they were slaves and for what things; and after a
little time consider what a condition they will be in.

X—136

21. That is for the good of each thing, which the universal
nature brings to each. And it is for its good at the time when
nature brings it.
22. “The earth loves the shower”; and “the solemn ether (sky)
loves the earth”: and the universe loves to make whatever is
about to be. I say then to the universe, that I love as you love.
And is not this also said, that “this or that loves (wants) to be
produced”?
23. Either you live here and have already accustomed
yourself to it, or you are going away, and this was your own
will; or you are dying and have discharged your duty. But
besides these things there is nothing. Be of good cheer, then.
24. Let this always be plain to you, that this piece of land is
like any other; and that all things here are the same with
things on top of a mountain, or on the sea-shore, or wherever
you choose to be. For you will find just what Plato says,
Dwelling within the walls of a city as in a shepherd’s fold on
a mountain.
What is my ruling faculty now to me? And of what nature am
I now making of it? And for what purpose am I now using it?
Is it void of understanding? Is it loosed and rent asunder from
social life? Is it melted into and mixed with the poor flesh so
as to move together with it?
25. He who flies from his master is a runaway; but the law is
master, so he who breaks the law is a runaway. And he also
who is grieved or angry or afraid, is dissatisfied because
something has been or is or shall be of the things which are
X—137

appointed by him who rules all things, and He is Law, and
assigns to every man what is fit. He who then fears or is
grieved or is angry is a runaway.
26. A man deposits seed in a womb and goes away, and then
another cause takes it, and labors on it and makes a child.
What a thing from such a material! Again, the child passes
food down through the throat, and then another cause takes it
and makes perception and motion, and in the end life and
strength and other things; how many and how strange, I
observe then the things which are produced in such a hidden
way, and see the power just as we see the power which
carries things downwards and upwards, not with the eyes, but
still no less plainly.
27. Constantly consider how all things such as they are now,
in time past also were; and consider that they will be the same
again. And place before your eyes entire dramas and stages of
the same form, whatever you have learned from your
experience or from older history; for example, the whole
court of Hadrian, and the whole court of Antoninus, and the
whole court of Philip, Alexander, Croesus; for all those were
such dramas as we see now, only with different actors.
28. Imagine every man who is grieved at anything or
discontented to be like a pig, which is sacrificed and kicks
and screams. Like this pig also is he who on his bed in silence
laments the bonds in which we are held. And consider that
only to the rational animal is it given to follow voluntarily
what happens. While to follow is a necessity imposed on all.
29. Severally on the occasion of everything that you do, pause
X—138

and ask yourself, if death is a dreadful thing because it
deprives you of this.
30. When you are offended at any man’s fault, forthwith turn
to yourself and reflect in what like manner you do err
yourself; for example, in thinking that money is a good thing,
or pleasure, or a bit of reputation, and the like. For by
attending to this you will quickly forget your anger, if this
consideration also is added, that the man is compelled: for
what else could he do? or if you are able, take away from him
the compulsion.
31. When you have seen Satyron the Socratic, think of either
Eutyches or Hymen, and when you have seen Euphrates,
think of Eutychion or Silvanus, and when you have seen
Alciphron think of Tropaeophorus, and when you have seen
Xenophon think of Crito or Severus, and when you have
looked on yourself, think of any other Caesar, and in the case
of every one do in like manner. Then let this thought be in
your mind, Where then are those men? Nowhere, or nobody
knows where. For thus continuously you will look at human
things as smoke and nothing at all; especially if you reflect at
the same time that what has once changed will never exist
again in the infinite duration of time.
32. But you, in what a brief space of time is your existence?
And why are you not content to pass through this short time
in an orderly way? What matter and opportunity for your
activity are you avoiding? For what else are all these things,
except exercises for the reason, when it has viewed carefully
and by examination into their nature the things which happen
X—139

in life? Persevere then until you shall have made these things
your own, as the stomach which is strengthened makes all
things its own, as the blazing fire makes flame and brightness
out of everything that is thrown into it.
33. Let it not be in any man’s power to say truly of you that
you are not simple or that you are not good; but let him be a
liar whoever shall think anything of this kind about you; and
this is altogether in your power. For who is he that shall
hinder you from being good and simple? Do you only
determine to live no longer, unless you shall be such? For
neither does reason allow you to live, if you are not such.
What is that which as to this material (our life) can be done or
said in the way most conformable to reason. For whatever
this may be, it is in your power to do it or to say it, and do not
make excuses that you are hindered. You will not cease to
lament till your mind is in such a condition, that what luxury
is to those who enjoy pleasure, such shall be to you, in the
matter which is subjected and presented to you, the doing of
the things which are conformable to man’s constitution; for a
man ought to consider as an enjoyment everything which it is
in his power to do according to his own nature. And it is in
his power everywhere. Now, it is not given to a cylinder to
move everywhere by its own motion, nor yet to water nor to
fire, nor to anything else which is governed by nature, nor an
irrational soul, for the things which check them and stand in
the way are many. But intelligence and reason are able to go
through everything that opposes them, and in such manner as
they are formed by nature and as they choose. Place before
your eyes this facility, with which the reason will be carried
X—140

through all things, as fire upwards, as a stone downwards, as
a cylinder down an inclined surface, and seek for nothing
further.
For all other obstacles either affect the body only, which is a
dead thing; or, except through opinion and the yielding of the
reason itself. They do not crush nor do any harm of any kind;
for if they did, he who felt it would immediately become bad.
Now in the case of all things which have a certain
constitution, whatever harm may happen to any of them, that
which is so affected becomes consequently worse; but in the
like case, a man becomes both better, if one may say so, and
more worthy of praise by making a right use of these
accidents. And finally remember that nothing harms him who
is really a citizen, which does not harm the state; nor yet does
anything harm the state, which does not harm law (order);
and of these things which are called misfortunes not one
harms law. What then does not harm law does not harm either
state or citizen.
34. To him who is penetrated by true principles even the
briefest precept is sufficient, and any common precept, to
remind him that he should be free from grief and fear. For
example Leaves; some the wind scatters on the ground. So is
the race of men. Leaves, also are your children; and leaves
too are they who cry out as if they were worthy of credit and
bestow their praise, or on the contrary curse, or secretly
blame and sneer; and leaves, in like manner, are those who
shall receive and transmit a man’s fame to aftertimes. For all
such things as these “are produced in the season of spring,” as
the poet says; then the wind casts them down; then the forest
X—141

produces other leaves in their places. But a brief existence is
common to all things, and yet you avoid and pursue all things
as if they would be eternal. A little time, and you shall close
your eyes; and him who has attended you to your grave,
another soon will lament.
35. The healthy eye ought to see all visible things and not to
say, I wish for green things only; for this is the condition of a
diseased eye. And the healthy hearing and smelling ought to
be ready to perceive all that can be heard and smelled. And
the healthy stomach ought to be with respect to all food just
as the mill with respect to all things which it is formed to
grind. And accordingly the healthy understanding ought to be
prepared for everything which happens; but that which says,
Let my dear children live, and let all men praise whatever I
may do, is an eye which seeks for green things only, or teeth
which seek for tender steak.
36. There is no man so fortunate that there shall not be by
him when he is dying some who are pleased with what is
going to happen. Suppose that he was a good and wise man,
will there not be at last someone to say to himself, Let us at
last breathe freely being relieved from this schoolmaster? It is
true that he was harsh to none of us, but I perceived that he
tacitly condemned us.—This is what is said of a good man.
But in our own case how many other things are there for
which there are many who wish to get rid of us. You will
consider this then when you are dying, and you will depart
more contentedly by reflecting thus: I am going away from
such a life, in which even my associates in behalf of whom I
have striven so much, prayed, and cared, themselves wish me
X—142

to depart, hoping perchance to get some little advantage by it.
Why then should a man cling to a longer stay here? Do not
however for this reason go away less kindly disposed to them,
but preserving your own character, and friendly and
benevolent and mild, and on the other hand not as if you were
torn away; but as when a man dies a quiet death the poor soul
is easily separated from the body, such also ought to be your
departure from men, for nature united you to them and
associated you. But does she now dissolve the union? Well I
am separated as from kinsmen, not however dragged
resisting, but without compulsion; for this too is one of the
things according to nature.
37. Accustom yourself as much as possible on the occasion of
anything being done by any person, to inquire with yourself,
For what object is this man doing this? But begin with
yourself, and examine yourself first.
38. Remember that this which pulls the strings is the thing
which is hidden within: this is the power of persuasion, this is
life, this if one may so say, is man. In contemplating yourself
never include the vessel which surrounds you, and these
instruments which are attached about it. For they are like to
an axe, differing only in this, that they grow onto the body.
For indeed there is no more use in these parts without the
cause which moves and checks them, than in the weaver’s
shuttle, and the writer’s pen and the driver’s whip.

X—143

XI. XI. BOOK ELEVEN
1. THESE ARE THE PROPERTIES of the rational soul: it
sees itself, analyses itself, and makes itself such as it chooses;
the fruit which it bears, itself enjoys—for the fruits of plants
and that in animals which corresponds to fruits others
enjoy—it obtains its own end, wherever the limit of life may
be fixed. Not as in a dance and in a play and in such like
things, where the whole action is incomplete if anything cuts
it short; but in every part and wherever it may be stopped, it
makes what has been set before it full and complete, so that it
can say, I have what is my own. And further it traverses the
whole universe, and the surrounding vacuum, and surveys its
form, and it extends itself into the infinity of time, and
embraces and comprehends the periodical renovation of all
things, and it comprehends that those who come after us will
see nothing new, nor have those before us seen anything
more, but in a manner he who is forty years old, if he has any
understanding at all, has seen by virtue of the uniformity that
prevails, all things which have been and all that will be.
This too is a property of the rational soul, love of one’s
neighbor, and truth and modesty, and to value nothing more,
more than itself, which is also the property of Law. Thus then
right reason differs not at all from the reason of justice.
2. You will set little value on pleasing song and dancing and
the pancratium (boxing and wrestling in Greece), if you will
distribute the melody of the voice into its several sounds, and
ask yourself as to each if you are mastered by this; for you
XI—144

will be prevented by shame from confessing it: and in the
matter of dancing, if at each movement and attitude you will
do the same; and the like also in the matter of the pancratium.
In all things then, except virtue and the acts of virtue,
remember to apply yourself to their several parts, and by this
division to come to value them little: and apply this rule also
to your whole life.
3. What a soul that is, which is ready if at any moment it must
be separated from the body and ready either to be
extinguished or dispersed or continue to exist; but so that this
readiness comes from a man’s own judgment, not from mere
obstinacy, as with the Christians, but considerately and with
dignity and in a way to persuade another, without tragic
show.
4. Have I done something for the general interest? Well then I
have had my reward. Let this always be present to your mind,
and never stop doing such good.
What is your art? To be good. And how is this accomplished
well except by general principles, some about the nature of
the universe, and others about the proper constitution of man?
5. At first tragedies were brought on the stage as means of
reminding men of the things which happen to them, and that
it is according to nature for things to happen so, and that if
you are delighted with what is shown on the stage, you
should not be troubled with that which takes place on the
larger stage. For you see that these things must be
accomplished thus, and that even they bear them who cry out
“O Cithaeron.” And indeed, some things are said well by the
XI—145

dramatic writers, of which kind is the following especially:—
Me and my children, if the gods neglect, this has its reason
too.
And again we must not chale (swearing) and fret at that
which happens.
And Life’s harvest reaps like the wheat’s fruitful ear.
And other things of the same kind.
After tragedy the old comedy was introduced, which had a
magisterial freedom of speech, and by its very plainness of
speaking was useful in reminding men to beware of
insolence; and for this purpose too Diogenes used to take
from these writers.
But as to the middle comedy which came next, observe what
it was, and again for what object the new comedy was
introduced, which gradually sunk down into a mere
mimicking artifice. That some good things are said even by
these writers, everybody knows: but the whole plan of such
poetry and dramaturgy, to what end does it look!
6. How plain does it appear that there is not another condition
of life so well suited for philosophizing as this in which you
now happen to be.
7. A branch cut off from the adjacent branch must of
necessity also be cut off from the whole tree. So too a man
when he is separated from another man has fallen off from
the whole social community. Now as to a branch, another cuts
XI—146

it off, but a man by his own act separates himself from his
neighbor when he hates him and turns away from him, and he
does not know that he has at the same time cut himself off
from the whole social system. Yet he has this privilege
certainly from Zeus who framed society, for it is in our power
to grow again to that which is near to us, and to become a part
which helps to make up the whole. However, if it often
happens, this kind of separation, it makes it difficult for that
which detaches itself to be brought into unity and to be
restored to its former condition. Finally, the branch, which
from the first grew together with the tree, and has continued
to have one life with it, is Not like that which after being cut
off is then in-grafted; for this is something like what the
gardeners mean when they say that it grows with the rest of
the tree, but that it has not the same mind with it.
8. As those who try to stand in your way when you are
proceeding according to right reason, will not be able to turn
you aside from your proper action, so neither let them drive
you from your benevolent feelings towards them, but be on
your guard equally in both matters, not only in the matter of
steady judgment and action, but also in the matter of
gentleness towards those who try to hinder or otherwise
trouble you. For this also is a weakness, to be vexed at them,
as well as to be diverted from your course of action and to
give way through fear; for both are equally deserters from
their post, the man who does it through fear, and the man who
is alienated from him, who is by nature a kinsman and a
friend.
9. There is no nature which is inferior to art, for the arts
XI—147

imitate the nature of things. But if this is so, that nature which
is the most perfect and the most comprehensive of all natures,
cannot fall short of the skill of art. Now all arts do the inferior
things for the sake of the superior; therefore the universal
nature does so too. And indeed, hence is the origin of justice,
and it’s in justice the other virtues have their foundation: for
justice will not be observed if we either care for middle things
(things indifferent), or we are easily deceived and careless
and changeable.
10. If the things do not come to you, the pursuits and
avoidances of which disturb you, still in a manner you go to
them. Let then your judgment about them be at rest, and they
will remain quiet, and you will not be seen either pursuing or
avoiding.
11. The spherical form of the soul maintains its figure, when
it is neither extended outward towards any object, nor
contracted in recoil inwards, nor dispersed nor sinks down,
but is illuminated by light, by which it sees the truth, the truth
of all things and the truth that is in itself.
12. Suppose any man shall despise me. Let him look to that
himself. But I will look to this, that I be not discovered doing
or saying anything deserving of contempt. Shall any man hate
me? Let him look to it. But I will be mild and benevolent
towards every man, and ready to show even him his mistake,
not reproachfully, nor yet as making a display of my
endurance, but nobly and honestly, like the great Phocion,
unless indeed he only assumed it. For the interior parts ought
to be such, and a man ought to be seen by the gods neither
XI—148

dissatisfied with anything nor complaining. For what evil is it
to you, if you are now doing what is agreeable to your own
nature, and are satisfied with that which at this moment is
suitable to the nature of the universe, since you are a human
being placed at your post in order that what is for the
common advantage may in some way be done?
13. Men despise one another and flatter one another; and men
wish to raise themselves above one another, and crouch down
before one another.
14. How unsound and insincere is he who says, I have
determined to deal with you in a fair way.—What are you
doing man? There is no occasion to give this notice. It will
soon show itself by acts. The voice ought to be plainly
written on the forehead. Such as a man’s character is, he
immediately shows it in his eyes, just as he who is beloved
forthwith reads everything in the eyes of lovers. The man
who is honest and good ought to be exactly like a man who
smells strong, so that the bystander as soon as he comes near
him must smell whether he chooses or not. But the affectation
of simplicity is like a crooked stick. Nothing is more
disgraceful than a wolfish friendship (false friendship). Avoid
this most of all. The good and simple and benevolent show all
these things in the eyes, and there is no mistaking.
15. As to living in the best way, this power is in the soul if it
be indifferent to things which are indifferent (not in its power
to change). And it will be indifferent, if it looks on each of
these things separately and all together, and if it remembers
that not one of them produces in us an opinion about itself,
XI—149

nor comes to us; but these things remain immovable, and it is
we ourselves who produce the judgments about them, and as
we may say, write them in ourselves, it being in our power
Not to write them, and it being in our power, if perchance
these judgments have imperceptibly got admission to our
minds, to wipe them out; and if we remember also that such
attention will only be for a short time, and then life will be at
an end. Besides, what trouble is there at all in doing this? For
if these things are according to nature, rejoice in them, and
they will be easy to you: but if contrary to nature, seek what
is conformable to your own nature, and strive towards this,
even if it bring no reputation; for every man is allowed to
seek his own good.
16. Consider from where each thing is come, and of what it
consists, and into what it changes, and what kind of a thing it
will be when it has changed, and that it will sustain no harm.
If any have offended against you, consider first: What is my
relation to men, and that we are made for one another; and in
another respect, I was made to be set over them, as a ram over
the flock or a bull over the herd. But examine the matter from
first principles, from this: If all things are not mere atoms, it
is nature which orders all things: if this is so, the inferior
things exist for the sake of the superior, and these for the sake
of one another.
Second, consider what kind of men they are at table, in bed,
and so forth: and particularly, under what compulsions in
respect of opinions they are; and as to their acts, consider
with what pride they do what they do.
XI—150

Third, that if men do rightly what they do, we ought not to be
displeased; but if they do not rightly, it is plain that they do so
involuntarily and in ignorance. For as every soul is
unwillingly deprived of the truth, so also it is unwillingly
deprived of the power of behaving to each man according to
his deserts. Accordingly men are pained when they are called
unjust, ungrateful, and greedy, and in a word wrong-doers to
their neighbors.
Fourth, consider that you also do many things wrong, and that
you are a man like others; and even if you do abstain from
certain faults, still you have the disposition to commit them,
though either through cowardice, or concern about reputation,
or some such mean motive, you do abstain from such faults.
Fifth, consider that you do not even understand whether men
are doing wrong or not, for many things are done with a
certain reference to circumstances. And in short, a man must
learn a great deal to enable him to pass a correct judgment on
another man’s acts.
Sixth, consider when you are much vexed or grieved, that
man’s life is only a moment, and after a short time we are all
laid out dead.
Seventh, that it is not men’s acts which disturb us, for those
acts have their foundation in men’s ruling principles, but it is
our own opinions which disturb us. Take away these opinions
then, and resolve to dismiss your judgment about an act as if
it were something grievous, and your anger is gone. How then
shall I take away these opinions? By reflecting that no
wrongful act of another brings shame on you: for unless that
XI—151

which is shameful is alone bad, you also must of necessity do
many things wrong, and become a robber and everything else.
Eighth, consider how much more pain is brought on us by the
anger and vexation caused by such acts than by the acts
themselves, at which we are angry and vexed.
Ninth, consider that a good disposition is invincible, if it be
genuine, and not an affected smile and acting a part. For what
will the most violent man do to you, if you continue to be of a
kind disposition towards him, and if as opportunity offers,
you gently admonish him and calmly correcting his errors at
the very time when he is trying to do you harm, saying, Not
so, my friend: we are constituted by nature for something
else: I shall certainly not be injured, but you are injuring
yourself, my friend.—And show him with gentle tact and by
general principles that this is so, and that even bees do not do
as he does, nor any animals which are formed by nature to be
gregarious. And you must do this neither with any double
meaning nor in the way of reproach, but affectionately and
without any rancor in your soul; and not as if you were
lecturing him, nor yet that any bystander may admire, but
either when he is alone, and if others are present...
Remember these nine rules, as if you had received them as a
gift from the Muses, and begin at last to be a man while you
live. But you must equally avoid flattering men and being
angered at them, for both are unsocial and lead to harm. And
let this truth be present to you in the excitement of anger, that
to be moved by passion is not manly, but that mildness and
gentleness, as they are more agreeable to human nature, so
XI—152

also are they more manly; and he who possesses these
qualities possesses strength, nerves and courage, and not the
man who is subject to fits of passion and discontent. For in
the same degree in which a man’s mind is nearer to freedom
from all passion, in the same degree also is it nearer to
strength: and as the sense of pain is a characteristic of
weakness, so also is anger. For he who yields to pain and he
who yields to anger, both are wounded and both submit.
But if you will, receive also a tenth present from the leader of
the Muses (Apollo), and it is this—that to expect bad men not
to do wrong is madness, for he who expects this desires an
impossibility. But to allow men to behave so to others, and to
expect them not to do you any wrong, is also irrational and
tyrannical.
17. There are four principal aberrations of the superior faculty
against which you should be constantly on your guard, and
when you have detected them, you should wipe them out and
say on each occasion thus: First this thought is not necessary:
Second this tends to destroy social union: Third this which
you are going to say comes not from your real thoughts; for
you should consider it among the most absurd of things for a
man not to speak from his real thoughts. But the fourth is
when you shall reproach yourself for anything, for this is an
evidence of the diviner part within you being overpowered
and yielding to the less honorable and to the perishable part,
the body, and to its gross pleasures.
18. Your aerial part and all the fiery parts which are mingled
in you, though by nature they have an upward tendency, still
XI—153

in obedience to the disposition of the universe they may be
overpowered here in the compound mass (the body). And also
the whole of the earthly part in you and the watery, though
their tendency is downward, still can be raised up and occupy
a position which is not their natural one. In this manner then
the elemental parts obey the universal, for when they have
been fixed in any place perforce they remain there until again
the universal shall sound the signal for dissolution.
Is it not then strange that only your intelligent part should be
disobedient and discontented with its own place? And yet no
force is imposed on it, but only those things which are
conformable to its nature: still it does not submit, but is
carried in the opposite direction. For the movement towards
injustice and intemperance and to anger and grief and fear is
nothing else than the act of one who deviates from nature.
And also when the ruling faculty is discontented with
anything that happens, then too it deserts its post: for it is
constituted for piety and reverence towards the gods no less
than for justice. For these qualities also are comprehended
under the generic term of contentment with the constitution of
things, and indeed they are prior to acts of justice.
19. He who has not one and always the same object in life,
cannot be one and the same all through his life. But what I
have said is not enough, unless this also is added, what this
object ought to be. For as there is not the same opinion about
all the things which in some way or other are considered by
the majority to be good, but only about some certain things,
that is things which concern the common interest; so also
ought we to propose to ourselves an object which shall be of a
XI—154

common kind (social) and political. For he who directs all his
own efforts to this object, will make all his acts alike, and
thus will always be the same.
20. Think of the country mouse and of the town mouse, and
of the alarm and trepidation of the town mouse.
21. Socrates used to call the opinions of the many by the
name of Lamiae, bugbears to frighten children.
22. The Lace-daemonians at their public spectacles used to
set seats in the shade for strangers, but they themselves sat
down anywhere.
23. Socrates excused himself to Perdiccas for not going to
him, saying, It is because I would not perish by the worst of
all ends, that is, I would not receive a favor and then be
unable to return it.
24. In the writings of the Ephesians there was this precept,
constantly to think of some one of the men of former times
who practiced virtue.
25. The Pythagoreans bid us in the morning look to the
heavens that we may be reminded of those bodies which
continually do the same things and in the same manner
perform their work, and also be reminded of their purity and
nudity. For there is no veil over a star.
26. Consider what a man Socrates was when he dressed
himself in a skin, after Xanthippe his wife had taken his cloak
and gone out, and what Socrates said to his friends who were
ashamed of him and drew back from him when they saw him
XI—155

dressed thus.
27. Neither in writing nor in reading will you be able to lay
down rules for others before you shall have first learned to
obey rules yourself. Much more is this so in life. A slave to
your senses you are: free speech is not for you.
28. And my heart laughed within. And virtue they will curse,
speaking harsh words.
29. To look for the fig in winter is a madman’s act: such is he
who longs for his child before it has been granted to him.
30. When a man kisses his child, said Epictetus, he should
whisper to himself, “Tomorrow perchance you will die.”—
But those are words of bad omen.—“No word is a word of
bad omen,” said Epictetus, “which expresses any work of
nature; or if it is so, it is also a word of bad omen to speak of
the ears of corn being reaped.” The unripe grape, the ripe
bunch, the dried grape, all are changes, not into nothing, but
into something which exists not yet.
31. No man can rob us of our free will.
Epictetus also said, A man must discover an art (or rules)
with respect to giving his assent; and in respect to his
movements he must be careful that they be made with regard
to circumstances, that they be consistent with social interests,
that they have regard to the value of the object; and as to
sensual desire, he should altogether keep away from it; and as
to avoidance (aversion) he should not show it with respect to
any of the things which are not in our power (indifferent
XI—156

things).
The dispute then, he said, is not about any common matter,
but about being either mad, or with the help of philosophy,
wise and sober.
32. Socrates used to say, What do you want? Souls of rational
men or irrational?—Souls of rational men.—Of what rational
men? Sound or unsound?—Sound.—Why then do you not
seek for them?—Because we have them.—Why then do you
fight and quarrel?

XII. XII. BOOK TWELVE
1. ALL THOSE THINGS at which you wish to arrive by a
circuitous road, you can have now, if you do not refuse them
to yourself. And this means, if you will take no notice of all
the past, and trust the future to providence, and direct the
present only conformably to piety and justice. Conformably
to piety, that you may be content with the lot which is
assigned to you, for nature designed it for you and you for it.
Conformably to justice, that you may always speak the truth
freely and without disguise, and do the things which are
agreeable to law and according to the worth of each. And let
neither another man’s wickedness hinder you, nor opinion nor
voice, nor yet the sensations of the poor flesh which has
grown about you; for the passive part will look to this. If
then, whatever the time may be when you shall be near to
your departure, neglecting everything else you shall respect
XII—157

only your ruling faculty and the divinity within you, and if
you shall be afraid not because you must some time cease to
live, but if you shall fear never to have begun to live
according to nature—then you will be a man worthy of the
universe which has produced you, and you will cease to be a
stranger in your native land, and cease to wonder at things
which happen daily as if they were something unexpected,
and to be dependent on this or that.
2. God sees the minds (ruling principles) of all men bared of
the material vesture and rind and impurities. For with his
intellectual part alone he touches the intelligence only which
has flowed and been derived from himself into those bodies.
And if you also use yourself to do this, you will rid yourself
of much trouble. For he who regards not the poor flesh which
envelops him, surely will not trouble himself by looking after
raiment and dwelling and fame and such like externals and
show.
The things are three of which you are composed, a little body,
a little breath (life), and intelligence. Of these, the first two
are yours so far as it is your duty to take care of them; but the
third alone is properly yours. Therefore if you shall separate
from yourself, that is from your understanding, whatever
others do or say, and whatever you have done or said
yourself, and whatever future things trouble you because they
may happen, and whatever in the body which envelops you or
in the breath (life), which is by nature associated with the
body, which is attached to you independent of your will, and
whatever the external circumfluent vortex whirls around, so
that the intellectual power exempt from the things of fate can
live pure and free by itself, doing what is just and accepting
XII—158

what happens and saying the truth: if you will separate, I say,
from this ruling faculty the things which are attached to it by
the impressions of sense, and the things of time to come, and
of time that is past, and will make yourself like Empedocles’
sphere, All round, and in its joyous rest reposing; and if you
shall strive to live only what is really your life, that is the
present—then you will be able to pass that portion of life
which remains for you, up to the time of your death, free from
perturbations, nobly, and obedient to your own daemon (to
the god that is within you).
3. I have often wondered how it is that every man loves
himself more than all the rest of men, but yet sets less value
on his own opinion of himself than on the opinions of others.
If then a god or a wise teacher should present himself to a
man, and bid him to think of nothing and to design nothing
which he would not express as soon as he conceived it, he
could not endure it even for a single day. So much more
respect have we to what our neighbors shall think of us than
to what we shall think of ourselves.
4. How can it be that the gods after having arranged all things
well and benevolently for mankind, have overlooked this
alone, that some men and very good men, and men who as we
may say, have had most communion with the divinity, and
through pious acts and religious observances have been most
intimate with the divinity, when they have once died should
never exist again, but should be completely extinguished?
But if this is so, be assured that if it ought to have been
otherwise, the gods would have done it. For if it were just, it
XII—159

would also be possible; and if it were according to nature,
nature would have had it so. But because it is not so, if in fact
it is not so, be you convinced that it ought not to have been
so:—for you see even of yourself that in this inquiry you are
disputing with the Deity; and we should not thus dispute with
the gods, if then they are most excellent and most just;—but
if this is so, they would not have allowed anything in the
ordering of the universe to be neglected unjustly and
irrationally.
5. Practice yourself even in the things which you despair of
accomplishing. For even the left hand, which is ineffectual
for all other things for want of practice, holds the bridle more
vigorously than the right hand; in this it has been practiced.
6. Consider in what condition both in body and soul a man
should be when he is overtaken by death; and consider the
shortness of life, the boundless abyss of time past and future,
and the feebleness of all matter.
Contemplate the formative principles (forms) of things bare
of their coverings; the purposes of actions; consider what pain
is, what pleasure is, and death, and fame; who is it but
himself that is the cause of his uneasiness; how no man is
hindered by another; that everything is opinion.
In the application of your principles you must be like the
pancratiast (boxer), not like the gladiator; for the gladiator
lets fall the sword which he uses, and is killed; but the other
always has his hands, and needs to do nothing else than to use
them.

XII—160

7. See what things are in themselves, dividing them into
matter, form (causal) and purpose.
8. What a power man has to do nothing except what God will
approve, and to accept all that God may give him.
9. With respect to that which happens conformably to nature,
we ought to blame neither the gods, for they do nothing
wrong either voluntarily or involuntarily, nor men, for they
do nothing wrong except involuntarily. Consequently we
should blame nobody.
10. How ridiculous and what a stranger he is who is surprised
at anything which happens in life.
11. Either there is a fatal necessity and invincible order, or a
kind Providence, or a confusion without a purpose and
without a director. If then there is an invincible necessity,
why do you resist? But if there is a Providence, which allows
itself to be propitiated (averting anger), make yourself worthy
of the help of the divinity. But if there is a confusion without
a governor, be content that in such a tempest you have within
yourself a certain ruling intelligence. And even if the tempest
carry you away, let it carry away the poor flesh, the poor
breath, everything else; for the intelligence at least it will not
carry away.
Does the light of the lamp shine without losing its splendor
until it is extinguished; and shall the truth which is in you and
justice and temperance be extinguished before your death?
12. When a man has presented the appearance of having done
XII—161

wrong, say, How then do I know if this is a wrongful act?
And even if he has done wrong, how do I know that he has
not condemned himself? And so this is like tearing his own
face. Consider that he, who would not have the bad man do
wrong, is like the man who would not have the fig-tree to
bear juice in the figs, nor infants to cry and the horse to neigh,
and whatever else must of necessity be. For what must a man
do who has such a character? If then you are irritable, cure
this man’s disposition.
13. If it is not right, do not do it: if it is not true, do not say it.
For this let your efforts be.
14. In everything always observe what the thing is, which
produces for you an appearance, and resolve it by dividing it
into the formal (causal), the material, the purpose, and the
time within which it must end.
15. Perceive at last that you have in you something better and
more divine than the things which cause the various affects,
and as it were pull you by the strings. What is there now in
my mind? Is it fear, or suspicion, or desire, or any such kind?
First, do nothing inconsiderately, nor without a purpose.
Second, make your acts refer to nothing else than to a social
end. Consider that before long you will be nobody and
nowhere, nor will any of the things exist which you now see,
nor any of those who are now living. For all things are
formed by nature to change and be turned and to perish in
order that other things in continuous succession may exist.
16. Consider that everything is opinion, and opinion is within
XII—162

your power. Take away then, when you choose, your opinion,
and like a mariner who has doubled the promontory, you will
find calm, everything stable, and a tranquil bay.
17. Any one activity whatever it may be, when it has ceased
at its proper time, suffers no evil because it has ceased; nor he
who has done this act, does he suffer any evil for this reason
that the act has ceased. In like manner then the whole which
consists of all the acts, which is our life, if it ceases at its
proper time, suffers no evil for this reason that it has ceased;
nor he who has terminated this series at the proper time,
neither has he been ill dealt with. But the proper time and the
limit nature fixes, sometimes as in old age the peculiar nature
of man, but always the universal nature, and by the change of
these parts the whole universe continues ever young and
perfect. And everything which is useful to the universal is
always good and in its season. Therefore the termination of
life for every man is no evil, because neither is it shameful,
since it is both independent of the will and not opposed to the
general interest, but it is good, since it is seasonable and
profitable to and congruent with the universal. For thus too he
is moved by the deity who is moved in the same manner with
the deity, and moved towards the same things in his mind.
18. These three principles you must have in readiness. In the
things which you do, do nothing either inconsiderately nor
otherwise than as justice herself would act; but with respect to
what may happen to you from without, consider that it
happens either by chance or according to Providence, and you
must neither blame chance nor accuse Providence. Second,
consider what every being is from the seed to the time of its
XII—163

receiving a soul, and from the reception of a soul to the
giving back of the same, and of what things every being is
compounded and into what things it is resolved. Third, if you
should suddenly be raised up above the earth, and should look
down on human things, and observe the variety of them how
great it is, and at the same time also should see at a glance
how great is the number of beings who dwell around in the air
and the ether, consider that as often as you shall be raised up,
you would see the same things, sameness of form and
shortness of duration. Are these things to be proud of?
19. Cast away opinion: you are saved. Who then hinders you
from casting it away? When you are troubled about anything,
you have forgotten this,
•

that all things happen according to the universal
nature; and forgotten this,

•

that a man’s wrongful act is nothing to you; and
further you have forgotten this,

•

that everything which happens, always happened so,
and will happen so, and now happens so everywhere;
forgotten this also,

•

how close is the kinship between a man and the whole
human race, for it is a community, not of a little blood
or seed, but of intelligence. And you have forgotten
this too,

•

that every man’s intelligence is a god, and is an efflux
of the deity; and forgotten this,
XII—164

•

that nothing is a man’s own, but that his child and his
body and his very soul came from the deity; forgotten
this,

•

that everything is opinion; and lastly you have
forgotten

•

that every man lives the present time only, and loses
only this.

20. Constantly bring to your recollection those who have
complained greatly about anything, those who have been
most conspicuous by the greatest fame or misfortunes or
enmities or fortunes of any kind: then think where are they all
now? Smoke and ash and a tale, or not even a tale. And let
there be present to your mind also everything of this sort,
how Fabius Catullinus lived in the country, and Lucius Lupus
in his gardens, and Stertinius at Baiae, and Tiberius at
Capreae and Rufus at Velia; and in the end think of the eager
pursuit of anything conjoined with pride; and how worthless
everything is after which men violently strain; and how much
more philosophical it is for a man in the opportunities
presented to him to show himself justly, and moderately, as
one that follows the Gods with all simplicity. For a man to be
proud and high conceited, that he is not proud and high
conceited, is of all kinds of pride and presumption, the most
intolerable.
21. To them that ask you, Where have you seen the Gods, or
how know you certainly that there be Gods, that you are so
devout in their worship? I answer first of all that even to the
very eye, they are in some manner visible and apparent.
Secondly, neither have I ever seen my own soul, and yet I
XII—165

respect and honor it. So then for the Gods, by the daily
experience that I have of their power and providence towards
myself and others, I know certainly that they are, and
therefore I worship them.
22. Herein consists happiness of life, for a man to know
thoroughly the true nature of everything; what is the matter of
it, and what is the form of it: with all his heart and soul, ever
to do that which is just, and to speak the truth. What then
remains but to enjoy your life in a course and coherence of
good actions, one upon another immediately succeeding, and
never interrupted even for ever so little a while?
23. There is but one light of the sun, though it be intercepted
by walls and mountains, and other thousands of objects.
There is but one common substance of the whole world,
though it be concluded and restrained into several different
bodies, in numbers infinite. There is but one common soul,
though divided into innumerable particular essences and
natures. So there is but one common intellectual soul, though
it seems to be divided. And as for all other parts of those, the
generalities which we have mentioned, as either sensitive
souls or subjects, these of themselves (as naturally irrational)
have no common mutual reference one unto another, though
many of them contain a mind, or a reasoning faculty within
them, whereby they are ruled and governed. But of every
reasoning mind, this the particular nature that it has reference
to, whatsoever is of her own kind, with a desire to be united:
neither can this common affection, or mutual unity and
correspondence be here intercepted or divided, or confined to
particulars as those other common things are.
24. What do you desire? To live long. What? To enjoy the
XII—166

operations of a sensitive soul; or of the appetitive faculty? or
would you grow, and then decrease again? Would you long
be able to talk, to think and reason with yourself? Which of
all these seems unto you a worthy object of your desire? Now
if of all these you do find that they be but of little worth in
themselves, proceed on unto the last, which is in all things to
follow God and reason. But for a man to grieve that by death
he shall be deprived of any of these things, is both against
God and against reason.
25. What a small portion of vast and infinite eternity it is, that
is allowed unto every one of us, and how soon it vanishes into
the general age of the world: of the common substance, and
of the common soul also what a small portion is allotted unto
us: and in what a little clod of the whole earth (as it were) it is
that you do crawl. After you shall rightly have considered
these things with yourself; fancy not anything else in the
world any more to be of any weight and moment but this, to
do only that which your own nature doth require; and to
conform yourself to that which the common nature affords.
26. What is the present estate of my understanding? For
herein lies all indeed. As for all other things, they are without
the compass of my own will: and if without the compass of
my will, then they are as dead things unto me, and as it were
mere smoke.
27. To stir up a man to the contempt of death, this among
other things is of good power and efficacy, that even they
who esteemed pleasure to be happiness, and pain to be
misery, did nevertheless many of them contemn death as
much as any. And can death be terrible to him to whom that
only seems good, which in the ordinary course of nature is
XII—167

seasonable? To him to whom, whether his actions be many or
few, so they be all good, is all one; and who whether he
beholds the things of the world being always the same either
for many years, or for few years only, is altogether
indifferent?
O man! as a citizen you have lived, and conversed in this
great city of the world. Whether just for so many years, or
not, what is it to you? You have lived (you may be sure) as
long as the laws and orders of the city required; which may be
the common comfort to all. Why then should it be grievous to
you, if (not a tyrant, nor an unjust judge, but) the same nature
that brought you in, do now send you out of the world? As if
the praetor (leader below in rank to consul) should fairly
dismiss him from the stage, whom he had taken in to act for a
while. Oh, but the play is not yet at an end, there are but three
acts yet acted of it? You have well said: for in matter of life,
three acts is the whole play. Now to set a certain time to every
man’s acting, belongs to him only, who at first was cause of
your composition, so is now the cause of your dissolution. As
for yourself; you have to do with neither. Go your ways then
well pleased and contented: for so is He that dismissed you.

XIII. AFTERWARD QUESTIONS
I haven't wanted to put too much into the forward, because
it’s good if readers can make up their own impressions. My
notion is this book is about discovering what you hold in your
mental space. Aphorisms are said to be concise bits of
wisdom, so this is not a sequential story. They’re numbered
so that you can easily discuss them or go back to your
XIII—168

favorites, and the numbers are also reminders to pause
between thoughts to let them penetrate. But the numbers are
not from a Bible, nor commandments. In reality aphorisms
also act as model thoughts or benchmarks. They are one set
of written standards from which you can compare your own
thoughts on a wide range of topics. It becomes much easier
to see clearly among contrasting ideas. It's an opportunity,
and nobody is telling you that you need to measure your
thoughts. These suffice for a deep look into the self.
These are also written behaviors which most of us would call
morality. Nobody is telling you that you need to become
more moral. It is only up to you to take a look. Perhaps life
up until now is rather chaotic, and people of all modes of
ethics and motivations are encountered daily. That is a great
question to ask yourselves. Do we all have to be at the same
motivational level as others in our society in order to be
practical, or can we freely choose what kind of person to be?
We all came to chapter one, each with our own evaluation
scheme. For instance some might be perplexed by certain
words and phrases: God, Soul, Creator, Law, or Divine Law,
Universal Nature, Piety. My insight is that these words, and
all others, are open to free interpretation, and the sum and
total of the message is not damaged. So please don't be
troubled by any words, but just interpret them as you wish
and move on.
✓Well, some people might not like to read. They’re not here.
✓Thinking; with more than one option might create
confusion? How about when there are no defined choices,
But you get to make up a new path from scratch?
✓With economy, you might say, I already know all this.
(Such conceit of course can stop anything dead in its tracks.)
✓You might say, I am a Christian, so I only follow Jesus.
✓Why does he talk so much about death?
Your life is the root attachment. All others spring from that.
✓Talks of many things. Focus on the most impactful for you.
✓I think that there is a lot of repetition. Reminders right?
XIII—169

✓Marcus Aurelius had slaves, and didn’t know gender
choices. So how can he speak for the community of mankind?
The USA founders had slaves, is the US constitution bogus?
✓I can’t change my opinions because my opinions are the
truth. I don’t want to hold false opinions.
Well, lucky you. Has finding the truth eased your life?
Or is your truth a burden to bear?
✓If you accept absolutely everything that befalls you,
aren't you a limp dishrag? Accepting doesn’t mean not doing.
One thing common we can see in all people is that they want
to become empowered. How they go about that is a personal
choice. So many do it by gathering money, others by
gathering fame and reputation. These three tend to be a
currency that you can make deals with. Others take purpose
from their pet projects, or the environment, or through
goodness or religion, those are less of a currency in this day
and age.
But the grandfather of all empowerment is to be fully in
charge of your own state of mind. Let's call it equanimity.
With that one in place, all others can flow out at will. But
most people don't agree with that, because they see agitation
as strength. It's their belief. For the latter, the fundamental
mechanism is that beliefs create an adopted sense of justice.
That justice says "it shouldn't ought to be this way." That
triggers the mind to do something about it. And that tension,
has (in the end), created all the hell that exists on earth.
I am not advocating a utopia or perfect world. For sure it will
be the way that it has been. I am just pointing to the basic
dysfunctionality that rules the earth. Those that want to go
beyond this state are in search of peace if mind. What are
their methods?
0. Drugs and alcohol, which I’m not going to consider here.
1. One method is to run away. Get off the grid, and start a
truck farm. Nowadays there's nowhere that is far enough
away to be free.
XIII—170

2. Another is to shut down the mind. You really want to shut
down just the agitations, but not knowing how, you take the
whole thing. Meditate; longer hours will get you
somewhere. It IS peaceful, until I stop. The rest of life is
even more dysfunctional, because of my dislikes.
3. Some have a spontaneous "spiritual experience". Code
word for something I cannot explain. I explain it anyway
using spiritual jargon. I believe it, because something did
happen.
4. Another way they call "find your purpose". Maybe it's to
do good works? At least good from your point of view.
Much of it may be helpful, some of it is surely meddling or
has other side effects.
5. The last way is to become familiar with how thoughts are
triggered, and how they become emotional content. Then
learn not to pick up those triggers. This is slower, but it's a
natural organic process, which can't leave you stranded.
The first 3 come with arrogance, because, Hey, I already have
it. (Peace of Mind that is.)
The 4th, maybe it comes with satisfaction, superiority or
pride?
The 5th, comes with humility, because whatever I know, I am
always learning more.
Arrogance will stop any discovery dead in its tracks.
Superiority, well that's exactly what we see now ruling the
world. Humility will continually open more and more doors.
Number Two is supposed to be a shortcut. But not knowing
how the mind functions, the same stress always regenerates
itself. So mind (your best tool) becomes you worst enemy.
Number Three, if it happens, well you're there. But you don't
know how. So when you lose it, you twist and turn in agony
until, and if, you can get it back. It is not as impactful as the
first time, so it's always disappointing.
Four, good works are really the adopting of other people's
problems. So now you are not only set-off by your own
dysfunction, but by that of the whole world.
You fight the endless good fight.
XIII—171

Five, as you learn your mind and what triggers it, you find the
doorway both in and out of tranquility, and you're never
anymore afraid of losing it. You can go back anytime, until
finally there is no preference either one way or the other.
I was so certain the moment I first read this book that it is a
toolbox for equanimity, leading right to number five. It's
what I would call the highest stage of empowerment, because
it contains both the in and the out. And it can contain all the
rest. These writings ask you very directly, "Who Are You?"
What do you identify with? Some people identify with the
body. They love to exercise, then they're tired and go to
sleep. Tomorrow they do it again. True they get health and
other things. When old, the body starts breaking down. Then
life is all about patching it up, and suffering through it.
(I don't discount that necessity.)
Some people identify with their fears. They complain a lot
about everything, and tomorrow their fears are even stronger,
and so they have "grown" too. Some people identify with
their desires. They do everything to achieve them and count
up their goods to see if they have expanded. Or if you believe
to be a more evolved person, try to curb those desires and
count how many you have overcome.
Some might even say “I am pure spirit”. But what can you
know about that, and is it by its conspicuous absence? And it
is equally distributed among all forms of turmoil, so it doesn’t
favor peace of mind, nor even peace on earth.
But man's most precious possession is his self-awareness and
ability to adopt a structure of reason and rationality to
organize his life. A man may have all possessions and a
strong body, but if he is afflicted with dementia there is
nothing left of his mind. Then the priorities of life become
glaringly self evident. So this book councils to care for your
rationality with all of your dedication and attention. Never
ever give it away to any man nor to any concept. Yet most
people get angry or vexed or disheartened at so many things.
They drag their state of mind through the mud and give it
XIII—172

away daily for two cents. These writing suggest that nothing
and nobody has the power to rob your state of mind, except
your opinion about that event. What hinders you from
changing that opinion?
Will a reader change all opinions that trouble, just to
experience a pure tranquil mind? Perhaps it is not necessary,
once you understand the mechanism of equanimity you can
use it on those occasions of need.
The real key to these writings is that they are tools for your
empowerment. That's more important that improved moral
behavior or non-offense through acceptance. Any rejection
of your circumstances is a trigger for counter thoughts and
counter emotions. It is all about the opinion of your adopted
sense of justice. Powerful emotions are supposed to give us
more strength, but in reality they throw us off balance.
Accepting what befalls you extinguishes the uninvited
emotional response, but it does not preclude doing something
about it. Yes, take the next step, but do so from a well
balanced demeanor, and with forethought for all the options.
(And just accepting is of course one of those options.)
Will it really work to transform my mind? You have to
include all the steps. In many passages you will read to the
effect, that if you feel wronged attempt to instruct, or reason
with the person. If it's not possible you'll know that you can
also bear it without damage. Or other passages such as, if any
part of you feels damaged (your body for instance), let that
part speak up. Don't leave out this step to speak. Otherwise
years might go by to discover by then, it was suppression of,
and not defusing the complaint. The danger is an unexpected
blow-up. Especially true for family and neighbors, where
without speaking, discontent can build up for years.
Speak, but speak kindly.
I have been calling this book a doorway. You can inspect this
doorway, look through it, and even step to the other side. Or
come back to this side. The point is that new ideas, even
small ones about the relationships close to you, will set you
XIII—173

on a new path with those people. That new path will develop,
and many new trails will open up in your life. If I say
“doorway” it might be taken that everything is different in a
new room. Things are changed, but really what you find is
another doorway, and you can step through that one by
changing a few more ideas. Changing how? That’s up to
you, when you look and see what now seems inadequate.
Again, please don't believe this from me. This is a personal
experiment, if you choose to do it. I wish you well with it.
Richard Miller, 2020

nevernothere@protonmail.com

XIV. Letters from Marcus Aurelius

CORRESPONDENCE OF M. AURELIUS ANTONINUS
AND M. CORNELIUS FRONTO (to get the feel of these
men and of the times.)
CORNELIUS FRONTO was a Roman by descent, but of
provincial birth, being native to Cirta, in Numidia.
Then he migrated to Rome in the reign of Hadrian, and
became the most famous rhetorician of his day. As a
pleader and orator he was counted by his
contemporaries hardly inferior to Tully himself, and as
a teacher his aid was sought for the noblest youths of
Rome. To him was entrusted the education of M.
Aurelius and of his colleague L. Verus in their
boyhood; and he was rewarded for his efforts by a seat
in the Senate and the consular rank (A.D. 143). By the
exercise of his profession he became wealthy; and if he
speaks of his means as not great, he must be
comparing his wealth with the grandees of Rome, not

XIV—174

with the ordinary citizen.
Before the present century nothing was known of the
works of Fronto, except a grammatical treatise; but in
1815 Cardinal Mai published a number of letters and
some short essays of Fronto, which he had discovered
in a palimpsest (old writing partially erased), in Milan.
Other parts of the same MS. he found later in the
Vatican, the whole being collected and edited in the
year 1823. We now possess parts of his
correspondence with Antoninus Pius, with M. Aurelius,
with L. Verus, and with certain of his friends, and also
several rhetorical and historical fragments. Though
none of the more ambitious works of Fronto have
survived, there are enough to give proof of his powers.
Never was a great literary reputation less deserved. It
would be hard to conceive of anything more vapid than
the style and conception of these letters; clearly the
man was a pedant without imagination or taste. Such
indeed was the age he lived in, and it is no marvel that
he was like to his age. But there must have been more
in him than mere pedantry; there was indeed a heart
in the man, which Marcus found, he found also a
tongue which could speak the truth. Fronto’s letters
are by no means free from exaggeration and laudation,
but they do not show that loathsome flattery which
filled the Roman court. He really admires what he
praises, and his way of saying so is not unlike what
often passes for criticism at the present day. He is not
afraid to reprove what he thinks amiss; and the
astonishment of Marcus at this will prove, if proof were
needed, that he was not used to plain dealing. He
writes:
How happy I am that my friend Marcus Cornelius, so
distinguished as an orator and so noble as a man,

XIV—175

thinks me worth praising and blaming.
In another place he deems himself blest because
Fronto had taught him to speak the truth; although
the context shows him to be speaking of expression, it
is still a point in favor of Fronto. A sincere heart is
better than literary taste; and if Fronto had not done
his duty by the young prince, it is not easy to
understand the friendship which remained between
them up to the last.
An example of the frankness which was between them
is given by a difference they had over the case of
Herodes Atticus. Herodes was a Greek rhetorician who
had a school at Rome, and Marcus Aurelius was
among his pupils. Both Marcus and the Emperor
Antoninus had a high opinion of Herodes; and all we
know goes to prove he was a man of high character
and princely generosity. When quite young he was
made administrator of the free cities in Asia, nor is it
surprising to find that he made bitter enemies there;
indeed, a just ruler was sure to make enemies. The end
of it was that an Athenian deputation, headed by the
orators Theodotus and Demostratus, made serious
accusations against his honor. There is no need to
discuss the merits of the case here; suffice it to say,
Herodes succeeded in defending himself to the
satisfaction of the emperor. Fronto appears to have
taken the delegates’ part, and to have accepted a brief
for the prosecution, urged to some extent by personal
considerations; and in this cause Marcus Aurelius
writes to Fronto as follows:
AURELIUS CÆSAR to his friend FRONTO, greeting.
I know you have often told me you were anxious to find
how you might best please me. Now is the time; now
you can increase my love towards you, if it can be

XIV—176

increased. A trial is at hand, in which people seem
likely not only to hear your speech with pleasure, but
to see your indignation with impatience. I see no one
who dares give you a hint in the matter; for those who
are less friendly, prefer to see you act with some
inconsistency; and those who are more friendly, fear to
seem too friendly to your opponent if they should
dissuade you from your accusation; then again, in case
you have prepared something neat for the occasion,
they cannot endure to rob you of your harangue by
silencing you. Therefore, whether you think me a rash
counselor, or a bold boy, or too kind to your opponent,
not because I think it better, I will offer my counsel
with some caution. But why have I said, offer my
counsel? No, I demand it from you; I demand it boldly,
and if I succeed, I promise to remain under your
obligation. What? you will say if I am attacked, shall I
not pay tit for tat? Ah, but you will get greater glory, if
even when attacked you answer nothing. Indeed, if he
begins it, answer as you will and you will have fair
excuse; but I have demanded of him that he shall not
begin, and I think I have succeeded. I love each of you
according to your merits and I know that lie was
educated in the house of P. Calvisius, my grandfather,
and that I was educated by you; therefore I am full of
anxiety that this most disagreeable business shall be
managed as honorably as possible. I trust you may
approve of my advice, for my intention you will
approve. At least I prefer to write unwisely rather than
to be silent unkindly.
Fronto replied, thanking the prince for his advice, and
promising that he will confine himself to the facts of
the case. But he points out that the charges brought
against Herodes were such that they can hardly be
made agreeable; amongst them being spoliation,
violence, and murder. However, he is willing even to let

XIV—177

some of these drop if it be the prince’s pleasure. To this
Marcus returned the following answer:
This one thing, my dearest Fronto, is enough to make
me truly grateful to you, that so far from rejecting my
counsel, you have even approved it. As to the question
you raise in your kind letter, my opinion is this: all
that concerns the case which you are supporting must
be clearly brought forward; what concerns your own
feelings, although you may have had just provocation,
should be left unsaid.
The story does credit to both. Fronto shows no loss of
temper at the interference, nor shrinks from stating his
case with frankness; and Marcus, with forbearance
remarkable in a prince, does not command that his
friend be left unmolested, but merely stipulates for a
fair trial on the merits of the case.
Another example may be given from a letter of Fronto’s:
Here is something else quarrelsome and querulous. I
have sometimes found fault with you in your absence
somewhat seriously in the company of a few of my
most intimate friends: at times for example, when you
mixed in society with a more solemn look than was
fitting, or would read books in the theatre or in a
banquet; nor did I absent myself from theatre or
banquet when you did. Then I used to call you a hard
man, no good company, even disagreeable, sometimes,
when anger got the better of me. But did anyone else in
the same banquet speak against you, I could not
endure to hear it with equanimity. Thus it was easier
for me to say something to your disadvantage myself,
than to hear others do it; just as I could more easily
bear to chastise my daughter Gratia, than to see her
chastised by another.

XIV—178

The affection between them is clear from every page of
the correspondence. A few instances are now given,
which were written at different periods starting from
Aurelius’ youth:
TO MY MASTER.
This is how I have past the last few days. My sister was
suddenly seized with an internal pain, so violent that I
was horrified at her looks; my mother in her
trepidation on that account accidentally bruised her
side on a corner of the wall; she and we were greatly
troubled about that blow. For myself; on going to rest I
found a scorpion in my bed; but I did not lie down
upon him, I killed him first. If you are getting on better,
that is a consolation. My mother is easier now, thanks
be to God. Good-bye, best and sweetest master. My
lady sends you greetings.
What words can I find to fit my luck, or how shall I
upbraid as it deserves the hard constraint which is laid
upon me? It ties me fast here, troubled my heart is,
and beset by such anxiety; nor does it allow me to
make haste to my Fronto, my life and delight, to be
near him at such a moment of ill-health in particular,
to hold his hands, to chafe gently that identical foot, so
far as may be done without discomfort, to attend him
in the bath, to support his steps with my arm.
This morning I did not write to you, because I heard
you were better, and because I was myself engaged in
other business, and I cannot ever endure to write
anything to you unless with mind at ease and
untroubled and free. So if we are all right let me know:
what I desire you know, and how properly I desire it I
know. Farewell my master, always in every chance first
in my mind, as you deserve to be. My master, see I am
not asleep, and I compel myself to sleep that you may

XIV—179

not be angry with me. You gather I am writing this late
at night.
What spirit do you suppose is in me, when I remember
how long it is since I have seen you, and why I have
not seen you, and it may be I shall not see you for a
few days yet, while you are strengthening yourself; as
you must. So while you lie on the sick-bed my spirit
also will lie low before, whereas, by God’s mercy you
shall stand upright, my spirit too will stand firm,
which is now burning with the strongest desire for you.
Farewell, soul of your prince, your friend, your pupil.
O my dear Fronto, most distinguished Consul! I yield,
you have conquered: all who have ever loved before you
have conquered out and out in love’s contest. Receive
the victor’s wreath; and the herald shall proclaim your
victory aloud before your own tribunal:
M. Cornelius Fronto, Consul, wins, and is crowned
victor in the Open International Love-race.
But beaten though I may be, I shall neither slacken
nor relax my own zeal. Well, you shall love me more
than any man loves any other man; but I, who possess
a faculty of loving less strong shall love you more than
anyone else loves you; more indeed than you love
yourself. Gratia and I will have to fight for it; I doubt I
shall not get the better of her. For as Plautus says, her
love is like rain, whose big drops not only penetrate the
dress, but drench to the very marrow.
Marcus Aurelius seems to have been about eighteen
years of age when the correspondence begins, Fronto
being some thirty years older. The systematic
education of the young prince seems to have been
finished, and Fronto now acts more as his adviser than
his tutor. He recommends the prince to use simplicity

XIV—180

in his public speeches, and to avoid affectation.
Marcus devotes his attention to the old authors who
then had a great vogue at Rome: Ennius, Plautus,
Nævius, and such orators as Cato and Gracchus.
Fronto urges on him the study of Cicero, whose letters,
he says, are all worth reading.
When he wishes to compliment Marcus he declares one
or other of his letters has the true Tullian ring. Marcus
gives his nights to reading when he ought to be
sleeping. He exercises himself in verse composition and
on rhetorical themes. He writes to Fronto:
It is very nice of you to ask for my hexameters; I would
have sent them at once if I had them by me. The fact is
my secretary, Anicetus — you know who I mean — did
not pack up any of my compositions for me to take
away with me. He knows my weakness; he was afraid
that if I got hold of them I might, as usual, make
smoke of them. However, there was no fear for the
hexameters. I must confess the truth to my master: I
love them. I study at night, since the day is taken up
with the theatre. I am weary of an evening, and sleepy
in the daylight, and so I don’t do much. Yet I have
made extracts from sixty books, five volumes of them,
in these latter days. But when you read remember that
the “sixty” includes plays of Novius, and farces, and
some little speeches of Scipio; don’t be too much
startled at the number. You remember your Polemon;
but I pray you do not remember Horace, who has died
with Pollio as far as I am concerned. Farewell, my
dearest and most affectionate friend, most
distinguished consul and my beloved master, whom I
have not seen these two years. Those who say two
months, count the days. Shall I ever see you again?
Sometimes Fronto sends him a theme to work up, as

XIV—181

thus:
M. Lucilius tribune of the people violently throws into
prison a free Roman citizen, against the opinion of his
colleagues who demand his release. For this act he is
branded by the censor. Analyze the case, and then
take both sides in turn, attacking and defending.
Or again:
A Roman consul, doffing his state robe, dons the
gauntlet and kills a lion amongst the young men at the
Quinquatrus in full view of the people of Rome.
Denunciation before the censors.
The prince has a fair knowledge of Greek, and quotes
from Homer, Plato, Euripides, but for some reason
Fronto dissuaded him from this study. His Meditations
are written in Greek. He continued his literary studies
throughout his life, and after he became emperor we
still find him asking his adviser for copies of Cicero’s
Letters, by which he hopes to improve his vocabulary.
Fronto helps him with a supply of similes, which, it
seems, he did not think of readily. It is to be feared
that the fount of Marcus’ eloquence was pumped up by
artificial means.
Some idea of his literary style may be gathered from
the letter which follows:
I heard Polemo declaim the other day, to say
something of things sublunary, (earth, water, air, fire).
If you ask what I thought of him, listen. He seems to
me an industrious farmer, endowed with the greatest
skill, who has cultivated a large estate for corn and
vines only, and indeed with a rich return of fine crops.
But yet in that land of his there is no Pompeian fig or
Arician vegetable, no Tarentine rose, or pleasing

XIV—182

coppice, or thick grove, or shady plane tree; all is for
use rather than for pleasure, such as one ought rather
to commend, but cares not to love.
A pretty bold idea, is it not, and rash judgment, to pass
censure on a man of such reputation? But whereas I
remember that I am writing to you, I think I am less
bold than you would have me.
In that point I am wholly undecided.
There’s an unpremeditated hen-deca syllable for you.
So before I begin to poetize, I’ll take an easy farewell
with you. My heart’s desire, your Verus’ best beloved,
most distinguished consul, master most sweet.
Farewell I ever pray, sweetest soul.
What a letter do you think you have written me I could
make bold to say, that never did she who bore me and
nursed me, write anything SO delightful, so honeysweet. And this does not come of your fine style and
eloquence: otherwise not my mother only, but all who
breathe.
To the pupil, never was anything on earth so fine as
his master’s eloquence; on this theme Marcus fairly
bubbles over with enthusiasm.
Well, if the ancient Greeks ever wrote anything like
this, let those who know decide it: for me, if I dare say
so, I never read any invective of Cato’s so fine as your
encomium. O if my Lord could be sufficiently praised,
sufficiently praised he would have been undoubtedly
by you! This kind of thing is not done nowadays. It
were easier to match Pheidias, easier to match Apelles,
easier in a word to match Demosthenes himself, or
Cato himself; than to match this finished and perfect
work. Never have I read anything more refined,

XIV—183

anything more after the ancient type, anything more
delicious, anything more Latin. O happy you, to be
endowed with eloquence so great! O happy I, to be
tinder the charge of such a master! O arguments, O
arrangement, O elegance, O wit, O beauty, O words, O
brilliancy, O subtlety, O grace, O treatment, O
everything! Mischief take me, if you ought not to have a
rod put in your hand one day, a diadem on your brow,
a tribunal raised for you; then the herald would
summon us all — why do I say “us”? Would summon
all, those scholars and orators: one by one you would
beckon them forward with your rod and admonish
them. Hitherto I have had no fear of this admonition;
many things help me to enter within your school. I
write this in the utmost haste; for whereas I am
sending you so kindly a letter from my Lord, what
needs a longer letter of mine? Farewell then, glory of
Roman eloquence, boast of your friends, magnifico,
most delightful man, most distinguished consul,
master most sweet.
After this you will take care not to tell so many fibs of
me, especially in the Senate. A monstrous fine speech
this is! O if I could kiss your head at every heading of
it! You have looked down on all with a vengeance. This
oration once read, in vain shall we study, in vain shall
we toil, in vain strain every nerve. Farewell always,
most sweet master.
Sometimes Fronto descends from the heights of
eloquence to offer practical advice; as when he
suggests how Marcus should deal with his suite. It is
more difficult, he admits, to keep courtiers in harmony
than to tame lions with a lute; but if it is to be done, it
must be by eradicating jealousy. Says Fronto:
Do not let your friends envy each other, or think that

XIV—184

what you give to another is filched from them. . . . Keep
away envy from your suite, and you will find your
friends kindly and harmonious.
Here and there we meet with allusions to his daily life,
which we could wish to be more frequent. He goes to
the theatre or the law-courts, or takes part in court
ceremony, but his heart is always with his books. The
vintage season, with its religious rites, was always
spent by Antoninus Pius in the country. The following
letters give sonic notion of a day’s occupation at that
time:
MY DEAREST MASTER — I am well. Today I studied
from the ninth hour of the night to the second hour of
day, after taking food. I then put on my slippers, and
from time second to the third hour had a most
enjoyable walk up and down before my chamber. Then
booted and cloaked — for so we were commanded to
appear — I went to wait upon my lord the emperor. We
went hunting, did doughty deeds, heard a rumor that
boars had been caught, but there was nothing to see.
However, we climbed a pretty steep hill, and in the
afternoon returned home. I went straight to my books.
Off with the boots, down with the cloak; I spent a
couple of hours in bed. I read Cato’s speech on the
Property of Pulchra, and another in which he
impeaches a tribune. Ho, ho! I hear you cry to your
man, Off with you as fast as you can, and bring me
these speeches from the library of Apollo. No use to
send: I have those books with me too. You must get
around the Tiberian librarian; you will have to spend
something on the matter; and when I return to town, I
shall expect to go shares with him. Well, after reading
these speeches I wrote a wretched trifle, destined for
drowning or burning. No, indeed my attempt at writing
did not come off at all today; the composition of a

XIV—185

hunter or a vintager, whose shouts are echoing
through my chamber, hateful and wearisome as the
law-courts. What have I said? Yes, it was rightly said,
for my master is an orator. I think I have caught cold,
whether from walking in slippers or from writing badly,
I do not know. I am always annoyed with phlegm, but
today I seem to snivel more than usual. Well, I will
pour oil on my head and go off to sleep. I don’t mean to
put one drop in my lamp today, so weary am I from
riding and sneezing. Farewell, dearest and most
beloved master, whom I miss, I may say, more than
Rome itself.
MY BELOVED MASTER — I am well. I slept a little
more than usual for my slight cold, which seems to be
well again. So I spent the time from the eleventh hour
of the night to the third of the day partly in reading in
Cato’s Agriculture, partly in writing, not quite so badly
as yesterday indeed. Then, after waiting upon my
father, I soothed my throat with honey-water, ejecting
it without swallowing: I might say gargle, but I won’t,
though I think the word is found in Novius and
elsewhere. After attending to my throat I went to my
father, and stood by his side as he sacrificed. Then to
luncheon. What do you think I had to eat? A bit of
bread so big, while I watched others gobbling boiled
beans, onions, and fish full of roe. Then we set to work
at gathering the grapes, with plenty of sweat and
shouting, and, as the quotation runs,
“A few high-hanging clusters did we leave survivors of
the vintage.”
After the sixth hour we returned home. I did a little
work, and poor work at that. Then I had a long gossip
with my dear mother sitting on the bed. My
conversation was: What do you think my friend Fronto

XIV—186

is doing just now?
She said: And what do you think of my friend Gratia?
My turn now:
And what of our little Gratia, the sparrowkin? After this
kind of talk, and an argument as to which of you loved
the other most, the gong sounded, the signal that my
father had gone to the bath. We supped, after
ablutions in the oil-cellar — I mean we supped after
ablutions, not after ablutions in the oil-cellar; and
listened with enjoyment to the rustics gibing. After
returning, before turning on my side to snore, I do my
task and give an account of the day to my delightful
master, whom if I could long for a little more, I should
not mind growing a trifle thinner. Farewell, Fronto,
wherever you are, honey-sweet, my darling, my delight.
Why do I want you? I can love you while far away.
One anecdote puts Marcus before us in a new light:
When my father returned home from the vineyards, I
mounted my horse as usual, and rode on ahead some
little way. Well, there on the road was a herd of sheep,
standing all crowded together as though the place were
a desert, with four dogs and two shepherds, but
nothing else. Then one shepherd said to another
shepherd, on seeing a number of horsemen: ‘I say,’
says he, ‘look you at those horsemen; they do a deal of
robbery.’ When I heard this, I clap spurs to my horse,
and ride straight for the sheep. In consternation the
sheep scatter; hither and thither they are fleeting and
bleating. A shepherd throws his fork, and the fork falls
on the horseman who came next to me. We make our
escape.
We like Marcus none the worse for this spice of

XIV—187

mischief.
Another letter describes a visit to a country town, and
shows the antiquarian spirit of the writer:
M. CÆSAR to his Master M. FRONTO, greeting.
After I entered the carriage, after I took leave of you, we
made a journey comfortable enough, but we had a few
drops of rain to wet us. But before coming to the
country-house, we broke our journey at Anagnia, a
mile or so from the highroad. Then we inspected that
ancient town, a miniature it is, but has in it many
antiquities, temples, and religious ceremonies quite
out of the way. There is not a corner without its shrine,
or fane, or temple; besides, many books written on
linen, which belongs to things sacred. Then on the gate
as we came out was written twice, as follows: ‘Priest
don the fell. I asked one of the inhabitants what that
word was. He said it was the word in the Hernican
dialect for the victim’s skin, which the priest puts over
his conical cap when he enters the city. I found out
many other things which I desired to know, but the
only thing I do not desire is that you should be absent
from me; that is my chief anxiety. Now for yourself,
when you left that place, did you go to Aurelia or to
Campania? Be sure to write to me, and say whether
you have opened the vintage, or carried a host of books
to the country-house; this also, whether you miss me; I
am foolish to ask it, whereas you tell it me of yourself.
Now if you miss me and if you love me, send me your
letters often, which is a comfort and consolation to me.
Indeed I should prefer ten times to read your letters
than all the vines of Gaurus or the Marsians; for these
Signian vines have grapes too rank and fruit too sharp
in the taste, but I prefer wine to must for drinking.
Besides, those grapes are nicer to eat dried than fresh-

XIV—188

ripe; I vow I would rather tread them under foot than
put my teeth in them. But I pray they may be gracious
and forgiving, and grant me free pardon for these jests
of mine. Farewell, best friend, dearest, most learned,
sweetest master. When you see the must ferment in
the vat, remember that just so in my heart the longing
for you is gushing and flowing and bubbling. Goodbye.
Making all allowances for conventional exaggerations,
it is clear from the correspondence that there was deep
love between Marcus and his preceptor. The letters
cover several years in succession, but soon after the
birth of Marcus’ daughter, Faustina, there is a large
gap. It does not follow that the letters ceased entirely,
because we know part of the collection is lost; but
there was probably less intercourse between Marcus
and Fronto after Marcus took to the study of
philosophy under the guidance of Rusticus.
When Marcus succeeded to the throne in 161, the
letters begin again, with slightly increased formality on
Fronto’s part, and they go on for some four years,
when Fronto, who has been continually complaining of
ill-health, appears to have died. One letter of the later
period gives some interesting particulars of the
emperor’s public life, which are worth quoting. Fronto
speaks of Marcus’ victories and eloquence in the usual
strain of high praise, and then continues:
The army when you took it in hand was sunk in luxury
and revelry, and corrupted with long inactivity. At
Antiochia the soldiers had been wont to applaud at the
stage plays, knew more of the gardens at the nearest
restaurant than of the battlefield. Horses were hairy
from lack of grooming, horsemen smooth because their
hairs had been pulled out by the roots; a rare thing it

XIV—189

was to see a soldier with hair on arm or leg. Moreover,
they were better dressed than armed; so much so, that
Laelianus Pontius. a strict man of the old discipline,
broke the cuirasses (piece of armor), of some of them
with his finger-tips, and observed cushions on the
horses’ backs. At his direction the tufts were cut
through, and out of the horsemen’s saddles came what
appeared to be feathers plucked from geese. Few of the
men could vault on horseback, the rest clambered up
with difficulty by aid of heel and knee and leg not
many could throw a lance hurtling, most did it without
force or power, as though they were things of wool.
Dicing was common in the camp, sleep lasted all night,
or if they kept watch it was over the wine-cup. By what
regulations to restrain such soldiers as these, and to
turn them to honesty and industry, did you not learn
from Hannibal’s sternness, the discipline of Africanus,
the acts of Metellus recorded in history?
After the preceptorial (expert or specialist), letters
cease the others are concerned with domestic events,
health and sickness, visits or introductions, birth or
death. Thus the emperor writes to his old friend, who
had shown some diffidence in seeking an interview:
TO MY MASTER.
I have a serious grievance against you, my dear
master, yet indeed my grief is more than my grievance,
because after so long a time I neither embraced you
nor spoke to you, though you visited the palace, and
the moment after I had left the prince my brother. I
reproached my brother severely for not recalling me;
nor dare he deny the fault.
Fronto again writes on one occasion:
I have seen your daughter. It was like seeing you, and

XIV—190

Faustina in infancy, so much that is charming her face
has taken from each of yours.
Or again, at a later date:
I have seen your chicks, most delightful sight that ever
I saw in my life, so like you that nothing is more like
than the likeness. . . . By the mercy of Heaven they
have a healthy color and strong lungs. One held a
piece of white bread, like a little prince, the other a
common piece, like a true philosophers son.
Marcus, we know, was devoted to his children. They
were delicate in health, in spite of Fronto’s assurance,
and only one son survived the father. We find echoes of
this affection now and again in the letters. Writes
Marcus:
We have summer heat here still but since my little girls
are pretty well, if I may say so, it is like the bracing
climate of spring to us.
When little Faustina came back from the valley of the
shadow of death, her father at once writes to inform
Fronto. The sympathy he asks he also gives, and as old
age brings more and more infirmity, Marcus becomes
even more solicitous for his beloved teacher. The poor
old man suffered a heavy blow in the death of his
grandson, on which Marcus writes:
I have just heard of your misfortune. Feeling grieved as
I do when one of your joints gives you pain, what do
you think I feel, dear master, when you have pain of
mind?
The old man’s reply, in spite of a certain selfconsciousness, is full of pathos. He recounts with pride
the events of a long and upright life, in which he has

XIV—191

wronged no man, and lived in harmony with his
friends and family. His affectations fall away from him,
as the cry of pain is forced from his heart:
Many such sorrows has fortune visited me with all my
life long. To pass by my other afflictions, I have lost five
children under the most pitiful conditions possible: for
the five I lost one by one when each was my only child,
suffering these blows of bereavement in such a manner
that each child was born to one already bereaved. Thus
I ever lost my children without solace, and got them
amidst fresh grief. . . .
The letter continues with reflections on the nature of
death, “more to be rejoiced at than bewailed, the
younger one dies,” and an arraignment of Providence
not without dignity, wrung from him as it were by this
last culminating misfortune. It concludes with a
summing-up of his life in protest against the blow,
which has fallen on his grey head:
Through my long life I have committed nothing which
might bring dishonor, or disgrace, or shame: no deed
of avarice or treachery have I done in all my days: nay,
but much generosity, much kindness, much truth and
faithfulness have I shown, often at the risk of my own
life. I have lived in amity with my good brother, whom I
rejoice to see in possession of the highest office by your
father’s goodness, and by your friendship at peace and
perfect rest. The offices which I have myself obtained I
never strove for by any underhand means. I have
cultivated my mind rather than my body; the pursuit
of learning I have preferred to increacing my wealth. I
preferred to the poor rather than bound by any man’s
obligation, even to want rather than to beg. I have
never been extravagant in spending money, I have
earned it sometimes because I must. I have

XIV—192

scrupulously spoken the truth, and have been glad to
hear it spoken to me. I have thought it better to be
neglected than to fawn, to be dumb than to feign, to be
seldom a friend than to be often a flatterer. I have
sought little, deserved not little. So far as I could, I
have assisted each according to my means. I have
given help readily to the deserving, fearlessly to the
undeserving. No one by proving to be ungrateful has
made me more slow to bestow promptly all benefits I
could give, nor have I ever been harsh to ingratitude.
(A fragmentary passage follows, in which he appears to
speak of his desire for a peaceful end, and the
desolation of his house.) I have suffered long and
painful sickness, my beloved Marcus. Then I was
visited by pitiful misfortunes: my wife I have lost, my
grandson I have lost in Germany: woe is me! I have lost
my Decimanus. If I were made of iron, at this time I
could write no more.
It is noteworthy that in his meditations Marcus
Aurelius mentions Fronto only once. All his literary
studies, his oratory and criticism (such as it was) is
forgotten; and, says he,
“Fronto taught me not to expect natural affection from
the highly-born.”
Fronto really said more than this: that “affection” is not
a Roman quality, nor has it a Latin name. Roman or
not Roman, Marcus found affection in Fronto; and if he
outgrew his master’s intellectual training, he never lost
touch with the true heart of the man it is that which
Fronto’s name brings up to his remembrance, not
dissertations on compound verbs or fatuous criticisms
of style.

XIV—193

XV. NOTES: from earlier translations
Most of this copy came from the George Long
translation.

Other Chief English translations
Meric Casaubon, 1634;
Jeremy Collier, 1701;
James Thomson, 1747;
R. Graves, 1792;
H. McCormac, 1844;
George Long, 1862;
G.H. Rendall, 1898; and
J. Jackson, 1906.
ADRIANUS, or Hadrian (76–138 A.D.), 14th Roman
Emperor.
AGRIPPA, M. Vipsanius (63–12 B.C.), a distinguished
soldier under Augustus.
ALEXANDER the Great, King of Macedonia, and
Conqueror of the East, 356– 323 B.C.
ANTISTHENES of Athens, founder of the sect of Cynic
philosophers, and an opponent of Plato, 5th century
B.C.

XV—194

ANTONINUS Pius, 15th Roman Emperor, 138–161
A.D., “one of the best princes that ever mounted a
throne.”
APATHIA: the Stoic ideal was calmness in all
circumstance an insensibility to pain, and absence of
all exultation at pleasure or good fortune.
APELLES, a famous painter of antiquity.
APOLLONIUS of Alexandria, called Dyscolus, or the “illtempered,” a great grammarian.
APOSTEME, tumor, excrescence.
ARCHIMEDES of Syracuse 287–212 B.C., the most
famous mathematician of antiquity.
ATHOS, a mountain promontory at the N. of the
Ægean Sea.
AUGUSTUS, first Roman Emperor (ruled 31 B.C.–14
A.D.).
AVOID, void.
BACCHIUS: there were several persons of this name,
and the one meant is perhaps the musician.
BRUTUS (1) the liberator of the Roman people from
their kings, and (2) the murderer of Caesar. Both
names were household words.
CÆSAR, C. Julius, the Dictator and Conqueror.
CAIETA, a town in Latium.
CAMILLUS, a famous dictator in the early days of the
Roman Republic.
CARNUNTUM, a town on the Danube in Upper

XV—195

Pannonia.
CATO, called of Utica, a Stoic who died by his own
hand after the battle of Thapsus, 46 B.C. His name
was proverbial for virtue and courage.
CAUTELOUS, cautious.
CECROPS, first legendary King of Athens.
CHARAX, perhaps the priestly historian of that name,
whose date is unknown, except that it must be later
than Nero.
CHIRURGEON, surgeon.
CHRYSIPPUS, 280–207 B.C., a Stoic philosopher, and
the founder of Stoicism as a systematic philosophy.
CIRCUS, the Circus Maximus at Rome, where games
were held. There were four companies who contracted
to provide horses, drivers, etc. These were called
Factiones, and each had its distinguishing colour: russata
(red), al- bata (white), veneta (blue), prasina (green). There
was high rivalry between them, and riots and
bloodshed not infrequently.
CITHAERON, a mountain range N. of Attica.
COMEDY, ANCIENT; a term applied to the Attic
comedy of Aristophanes and his time, which criticized
persons and politics, like a modern comic journal,
such as Punch. See New Comedy.
COMPENDIOUS, short.
CONCEIT, opinion.
CONTENTATION, contentment.
CRATES, a Cynic philosopher of the 4th century B.C.

XV—196

CRŒSUS, King of Lydia, proverbial for wealth; he
reigned 560–546 B.C.
CYNICS, a school of philosophers, founded by
Antisthenes. Their texts were a kind of caricature of
Socraticism. Nothing was good but virtue, nothing bad
but vice. The Cynics repudiated all civil and social
claims, and attempted to return to what they called a
state of nature. Many of them were very disgusting in
their manners.
DEMETRIUS of Phalerum, an Athenian orator,
statesman, philosopher, and poet. Born 345 B.C.
DEMOCRITUS of Abdera (460–361 B.C.), celebrated as
the “laughing philosopher,” whose constant thought
was “What fools these mortals be.” He invented the
Atomic Theory.
DIO of Syracuse, a disciple of Plato, and afterwards
tyrant of Syracuse. Murdered 353 B.C.
DIOGENES, the Cynic, born about 412 B.C., renowned
for his rudeness and hardihood.
DIOGNETUS, a painter.
DISPENSE WITH, put up with.
DOGMATA, pithy sayings, or philosophical rules of life.
EMPEDOCLES of Agrigentum, fl. 5th century B.C., a
philosopher, who first laid down that there were “four
elements.” He believed in the transmigration of souls,
and the indestructibility of matter.
EPICTETUS, a famous Stoic philosopher. He was of
Phrygia, at first a slave, then freedman, lame, poor,
and contented. The work called Encheiridion was
compiled by a pupil from his discourses.

XV—197

EPICUREANS, a sect of philosophers founded by
Epicurus, who “combined the physics of Democritus,”
i.e. the atomic theory, “with the ethics of Aristippus.”
They proposed to live for happiness, but the word did
not bear that coarse and vulgar sense originally which
it soon took.
EPICURUS of Samos, 342–270 B.C. Lived at Athens in
his “gardens,” an urbane and kindly, if somewhat
useless, life. His character was simple and temperate,
and had none of the vice or indulgence which was
afterwards associated with the name of Epicurean.
EUDOXUS of Cnidus, a famous astronomer and
physician of the 4th century B.C.
FATAL, fated.
FORTUIT, chance (adj.).
FRONTO, M. Cornelius, a rhetorician and pleader,
made consul in 143 A.D. A number of his letters to M.
Aur. and others are extant.
GRANUA, a tributary of the Danube.
HELICE, ancient capital city of Achaia, swallowed up by
an earthquake, 373 B.C.
HELVIDIUS Priscus, son-in-law of Thrasea Pætus, a
noble man and a lover of liberty. He was banished by
Nero, and put to death by Vespasian.
HERACLITUS of Ephesus, who lived in the 6th century
B.C. He wrote on philosophy and natural science.
HERCULANEUM, near Mount Vesuvius, buried by the
eruption of 79 A.D.
HERCULES [Book 11, XVI], should be Apollo. See

XV—198

Muses.
HIATUS, gap.
HIPPARCHUS of Biyournia, an astronomer of the 2nd
century B.C., “The true father of astronomy.”
HIPPOCRATES of Cos, about 460–357 B.C. One of the
most famous physicians of antiquity.
IDIOT, means merely the non-proficient in anything,
the “layman,” he who was not technically trained in
any art, craft, or calling.
LEONNATUS, a distinguished general under Alexander
the Great.
LUCILLA, daughter of M. Aurelius, and wife of Verus,
whom she survived.
MAECENAS, a trusted adviser of Augustus, and a
munificent patron of wits and literary men.
MAXIMUS, Claudius, a Stoic philosopher.
MENIPPUS, a Cynic philosopher.
METEORES, τά µετεωρολογικά, “high philosophy,” used
specially of astronomy and natural philosophy, which
were bound up with other speculations.
MIDDLE COMEDY, something “midway” between the
Old and New Comedy. See Comedy, Ancient, and New
Comedy.
MIDDLE THINGS [Books 6, XL; 7, XXI; 9, XLIII]. The
Stoics divided all things into virtue, vice, and
indifferent things; but as “indifferent” they regarded
most of those things which the world regards as good
or bad, such as wealth or poverty. Of these, some were

XV—199

“to be desired,” some “to be rejected.”
MUSES, the nine deities who presided over various
kinds of poesy, music, etc. Their leader was Apollo, one
of whose titles is Musegetes, the Leader of the Muses.
NERVES, strings.
NEW COMEDY, the Attic Comedy of Menander and his
school, which criticized not persons but manners, like
a modern comic opera. See Comedy, Ancient.
PALESTRA, wrestling school.
PANCRATIAST, competitor in the pancratium, a
combined contest which comprised boxing and
wrestling.
PARMULARII, gladiators armed with a small round
shield (parma).
PHEIDIAS, the most famous sculptor of antiquity.
PHILIPPUS, founder of the Macedonian supremacy,
and father of Alexander the Great.
PHOCION, an Athenian general and statesman, a noble
and high-minded man, 4th century B.C. He was called
by Demosthenes, “the pruner of my periods.” He was
put to death by the State in 317, on a false suspicion,
and left a message for his son “to bear no grudge
against the Athenians.”
PINE, torment.
PLATO of Athens, 429–347 B.C. He used the dialectic
method invented by his master Socrates. He was,
perhaps, as much poet as philosopher. He is generally
identified with the Theory of Ideas, that things are
what they are by participation with our eternal Idea.

XV—200

His “Commonwealth” was a kind of Utopia.
PLATONICS, followers of Plato.
POMPEII, near Mount Vesuvius, buried in the eruption
of 79 A.D.
POMPEIUS, Cn. Pompeius Magnus, a very successful
general at the end of the Roman Republic (106–48
B.C.).
PRESTIDIGITATOR, juggler.
PYTHAGORAS of Samos, a philosopher, scientist, and
moralist of the 6th century B.C.
QUADI, a tribe of S. Germany. M. Aurelius carried on
war against them, and part of this book was written in
the field.
RICTUS, gape, jaws.
RUSTICUS, Q. Junius, or Stoic philosopher, twice
made consul by M. Aurelius.
SACRARY, shrine.
SALAMINIUS [Book 7, XXXVII], Leon of Salamis.
Socrates was ordered by the Thirty Tyrants to fetch
him before them, and Socrates, at his own peril,
refused.
SARMATAE, a tribe dwelling in Poland.
SCELETUM, skeleton.
SCEPTICS, a school of philosophy founded by Pyrrho
(4th century B.C.). He advocated “suspension of
judgment,” and taught the relativity of knowledge and
impossibility of proof. The school is not unlike the

XV—201

Agnostic school.
SCIPIO, the name of two great soldiers, P. Corn. Scipio
Africanus, conqueror of Hannibal, and P. Corn. Sc. Afr.
Minor, who came into the family by adoption, who
destroyed Carthage.
SECUTORIANI (a word coined by C.), the secutores,
light-armed gladiators, who were pitted against others
with net and trident.
SEXTUS of Chaeronea, a Stoic philosopher, nephew of
Plutarch.
SILLY, simple, common.
SINUESSA, a town in Latium.
SOCRATES, an Athenian philosopher (469–399 B.C.),
founder of the dialectic method. Put to death on a
trumped-up charge by his countrymen.
STINT, limit (without implying niggardliness).
STOICS, a philosophic system founded by Zeno (4th
century B.C.), and systematized by Chrysippus (3rd
century B.C.). Their physical theory was a pantheistic
materialism, their summum bonum “to live according to
nature.” Their “wise man needs” nothing, he is
sufficient to himself; virtue is good, vice bad, external
things indifferent.
THEOPHRASTUS, a philosopher, pupil of Aristotle, and
his successor as president of the Lyceum. He wrote a
large number of works on philosophy and natural
history. Died 287 B.C.
THRASEA, P. Thrasea Pætus, a senator and Stoic
philosopher, a noble and courageous man. He was
condemned to death by Nero.

XV—202

TIBERIUS, 2nd Roman Emperor (14–31 A.D.). He spent
the latter part of his life at Capreae (Capri), off Naples,
in luxury or debauchery, neglecting his imperial
duties.
TO-TORN, torn to pieces.
TRAJAN, 13th Roman Emperor, (52–117 A.D.).
VERUS, Lucius Aurelius, colleague of M. Aurelius in
the Empire. He married Lucilla, daughter of M. A., and
died 169 A.D.
VESPASIAN, 9th Roman Emperor (9–79 A.D.).
XENOCRATES of Chalcedon, 396–314 B.C., a
philosopher, and president of the Academy.

XV—203
